---
title: Social Reward Learning Deficits and Concordant Brain Alterations in Rats Overexpressing
  Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1).**DOI:** 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1067-25.2025
authors:
- "Jos\xE9D\xF6ren"
- YuliyaKupriyanova
- "SandraSch\xE4ble"
- "SvenjaTro\xDFbach"
- BrodieMcGuire
- Anthony CVernon
- MichaelRoden
- CarstenKorth
- TobiasKalenscher
journal: 'The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1067-25.2025
publication_date: ''
source: Processed from scraped content
processing_date: '2025-10-21T22:15:04.883116'
content_type: research_paper
conditions: []
topics:
- neurochemistry
categories:
- neurochemistry
reading_level: academic
audience:
- professional
- researcher
patient_friendly: false
search_priority: standard
keywords: []
search_tags:
- academic
- peer-reviewed
- research
- neurochemistry
---

# Social Reward Learning Deficits and Concordant Brain Alterations in Rats Overexpressing Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1).**DOI:** 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1067-25.2025

**Authors:** JoséDören, YuliyaKupriyanova, SandraSchäble, SvenjaTroßbach, BrodieMcGuire, Anthony CVernon, MichaelRoden, CarstenKorth, TobiasKalenscher

**Journal:** The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience

**DOI:** 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1067-25.2025

## Abstract

Social deficits are a hallmark of schizophrenia, often characterized by impairments in processing and integrating socially transmitted information. However, translational models that accurately capture these deficits remain scarce. The Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia 1 gene (

social deficits are a hallmark of schizophrenia, often characterized by impairments in processing and integrating socially transmitted information. however, translational models that accurately capture these deficits remain scarce. the disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 gene ( disc1 ), a key susceptibility factor implicated in the etiology of psychiatric disorders, has been shown to cause disc1-protein aggregation and dysfunctional signaling when modestly overexpressed, ultimately resulting in aberrant dopamine homeostasis. in this study, we employed a transgenic rat model overexpressing human disc1 (tgdisc1 rats) to investigate social reward learning and microstructural integrity in the brain. using a modified social transmission of food preference (stfp) task, we report that male tgdisc1 rats failed to update reward preferences based on social information, despite intact non-social reward learning—suggesting a specific deficit in social reward learning. diffusion tensor imaging (dti) in a behaviorally naïve cohort revealed reduced fractional anisotropy (fa) in key subcortical regions, including the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and substantia nigra, as well as areas mediating cortical-subcortical communication as the thalamus. structural alterations in corresponding neuroanatomical areas have also been described in dti of schizophrenia patients. our findings link aberrant disc1 signaling with impaired connectivity in parts of the mesolimbic system, critical for integrating social information into decision-making. this model recapitulates both behavioral and structural endophenotypes of schizophrenia and suggests that social impairments may stem from a fine-grained circuit-selective dysfunction rather than a generalized reward processing deficit. the tgdisc1 rat thus offers a translational platform for probing the neural substrates of social dysfunction in psychiatric disorders. significance statement disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 (disc1) is a scaffold-protein regulating various functions related to psychiatric disorders. its overexpression causes disc1-protein aggregation and altered signaling, impairing dopamine pathways and behavior. we investigated whether disc1 overexpression affects social influence on reward valuation using a modified social transmission of food preference (stfp)-task. wildtype rats shift preferences after social interaction, favoring an initially non-preferred reward. in contrast, disc1-overexpressing (tgdisc1) rats did not shift their preference based on social information. in-vivo diffusion-tensor-imaging (dti) in a behaviorally naïve cohort of tgdisc1 rats revealed structural changes in limbic areas, potentially favoring the deficits in stfp. these findings highlight the importance of disc1-signaling and related circuits for integrating social cues during decision-making, offering insights into impaired social reward learning in psychiatric disorders. footnotes mr received fees consulting, lecturing or serving on advisory boards from astra zeneca, boehringer-ingelheim, echosens, eli lilly, merck-msd, madrigal, novo nordisk, madrigal, synergy and target rwe and has performed investigator-initiated research with support from boehringer-ingelheim, novo nordisk to the german diabetes center (ddz). no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the other authors. the project was supported by a grant from the german research foundation (deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft, dfg; grant no ko 1679 / 14-1 to ck and grant no. ka 2675/5-3 to tk). the ai-based language tools deepl and chatgpt3.5 have been used for grammar correction and improving readability. following their use, the authors thoroughly reviewed and revised the material as necessary, taking full responsibility for the final content of the publication. ↵ * shared co-authors sfn exclusive license . member log in log in using your username and password username * enter your journal of neuroscience username. password * enter the password that accompanies your username. forgot your user name or password? purchase access you may purchase access to this article. this will require you to create an account if you don't already have one. back to top email thank you for sharing this journal of neuroscience article. note: we request your email address only to inform the recipient that it was you who recommended this article, and that it is not junk mail. we do not retain these email addresses. your email * your name * send to * enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. you are going to email the following social reward learning deficits and concordant brain alterations in rats overexpressing disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (disc1) message subject (your name) has forwarded a page to you from journal of neuroscience message body (your name) thought you would be interested in this article in journal of neuroscience. your personal message captcha this question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to prevent automated spam submissions. view full page pdf citation tools social reward learning deficits and concordant brain alterations in rats overexpressing disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (disc1) josé dören , yuliya kupriyanova , sandra schäble , svenja troßbach , brodie mcguire , anthony c. vernon , michael roden , carsten korth , tobias kalenscher journal of neuroscience 11 september 2025, e1067252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1067-25.2025 citation manager formats bibtex bookends easybib endnote (tagged) endnote 8 (xml) medlars mendeley papers refworks tagged ref manager ris zotero respond to this article request permissions share social reward learning deficits and concordant brain alterations in rats overexpressing disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (disc1) josé dören , yuliya kupriyanova , sandra schäble , svenja troßbach , brodie mcguire , anthony c. vernon , michael roden , carsten korth , tobias kalenscher journal of neuroscience 11 september 2025, e1067252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1067-25.2025 share this article: copy tweet widget facebook like google plus one jump to section article figures & data info & metrics eletters pdf responses to this article respond to this article jump to comment: no eletters have been published for this article. related articles cited by... more in this toc section research articles dysfunction of unc119, a transducin-binding protein, leads to cone-rod dystrophy through activating jak-stat and nf-κb inflammatory pathways in the mouse retina pathway-specific ultrastructure of thalamocortical synapses in mouse somatosensory area s2 camkii drives synaptic maturation by coordinating spine remodeling and receptor segregation via liquid-liquid phase separation show more research articles neurobiology of disease the role of chaf1b in maintaining glioma stem cells stemness and regulating microglial polarization q neuron-induced hypothermia promotes functional recovery and suppresses neuroinflammation after brain injury behavioral timing of interictal spikes, but not rate, correlates with impaired working memory performance show more neurobiology of disease if (!window.adbutler){(function(){var s = document.createelement("script"); s.async = true; s.type = "text/javascript";s.src = 'https://servedbyadbutler.com/app.js';var n = document.getelementsbytagname("script")[0]; n.parentnode.insertbefore(s, n);}());} var adbutler = adbutler || {}; adbutler.ads = adbutler.ads || []; var abkw = window.abkw || ''; var plc540737 = window.plc540737 || 0; document.write(' '); adbutler.ads.push({handler: function(opt){ adbutler.register(183357, 540737, [160,600], 'placement_540737_'+opt.place, opt); }, opt: { place: plc540737++, keywords: abkw, domain: 'servedbyadbutler.com', click:'click_macro_placeholder' }}); home alerts follow sfn on bluesky visit society for neuroscience on facebook follow society for neuroscience on twitter follow society for neuroscience on linkedin visit society for neuroscience on youtube follow our rss feeds content early release current issue issue archive collections information for authors for advertisers for the media for subscribers about about the journal editorial board privacy notice contact accessibility copyright © 2025 by the society for neuroscience. jneurosci online issn: 1529-2401 the ideas and opinions expressed in jneurosci do not necessarily reflect those of sfn or the jneurosci editorial board. publication of an advertisement or other product mention in jneurosci should not be construed as an endorsement of the manufacturer’s claims. sfn does not assume any responsibility for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from or related to any use of any material contained in jneurosci . /* */## Results
link aberrant disc1 signaling with impaired connectivity in parts of the mesolimbic system, critical for integrating social information into decision-making. this model recapitulates both behavioral and structural endophenotypes of schizophrenia and suggests that social impairments may stem from a fine-grained circuit-selective dysfunction rather than a generalized reward processing deficit. the tgdisc1 rat thus offers a translational platform for probing the neural substrates of social dysfunction in psychiatric disorders. significance statement disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 (disc1) is a scaffold-protein regulating various functions related to psychiatric disorders. its overexpression causes disc1-protein aggregation and altered signaling, impairing dopamine pathways and behavior. we investigated whether disc1 overexpression affects social influence on reward valuation using a modified social transmission of food preference (stfp)-task. wildtype rats shift preferences after social interaction, favoring an initially non-preferred reward. in contrast, disc1-overexpressing (tgdisc1) rats did not shift their preference based on social information. in-vivo diffusion-tensor-imaging (dti) in a behaviorally naïve cohort of tgdisc1 rats revealed structural changes in limbic areas, potentially favoring the deficits in stfp. these findings highlight the importance of disc1-signaling and related circuits for integrating social cues during decision-making, offering insights into impaired social reward learning in psychiatric disorders. footnotes mr received fees consulting, lecturing or serving on advisory boards from astra zeneca, boehringer-ingelheim, echosens, eli lilly, merck-msd, madrigal, novo nordisk, madrigal, synergy and target rwe and has performed investigator-initiated research with support from boehringer-ingelheim, novo nordisk to the german diabetes center (ddz). no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the other authors. the project was supported by a grant from the german research foundation (deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft, dfg; grant no ko 1679 / 14-1 to ck and grant no. ka 2675/5-3 to tk). the ai-based language tools deepl and chatgpt3.5 have been used for grammar correction and improving readability. following their use, the authors thoroughly reviewed and revised the material as necessary, taking full responsibility for the final content of the publication. ↵ * shared co-authors sfn exclusive license . member log in log in using your username and password username * enter your journal of neuroscience username. password * enter the password that accompanies your username. forgot your user name or password? purchase access you may purchase access to this article. this will require you to create an account if you don't already have one. back to top email thank you for sharing this journal of neuroscience article. note: we request your email address only to inform the recipient that it was you who recommended this article, and that it is not junk mail. we do not retain these email addresses. your email * your name * send to * enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. you are going to email the following social reward learning deficits and concordant brain alterations in rats overexpressing disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (disc1) message subject (your name) has forwarded a page to you from journal of neuroscience message body (your name) thought you would be interested in this article in journal of neuroscience. your personal message captcha this question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to prevent automated spam submissions. view full page pdf citation tools social reward learning deficits and concordant brain alterations in rats overexpressing disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (disc1) josé dören , yuliya kupriyanova , sandra schäble , svenja troßbach , brodie mcguire , anthony c. vernon , michael roden , carsten korth , tobias kalenscher journal of neuroscience 11 september 2025, e1067252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1067-25.2025 citation manager formats bibtex bookends easybib endnote (tagged) endnote 8 (xml) medlars mendeley papers refworks tagged ref manager ris zotero respond to this article request permissions share social reward learning deficits and concordant brain alterations in rats overexpressing disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (disc1) josé dören , yuliya kupriyanova , sandra schäble , svenja troßbach , brodie mcguire , anthony c. vernon , michael roden , carsten korth , tobias kalenscher journal of neuroscience 11 september 2025, e1067252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1067-25.2025 share this article: copy tweet widget facebook like google plus one jump to section article figures & data info & metrics eletters pdf responses to this article respond to this article jump to comment: no eletters have been published for this article. related articles cited by... more in this toc section research articles dysfunction of unc119, a transducin-binding protein, leads to cone-rod dystrophy through activating jak-stat and nf-κb inflammatory pathways in the mouse retina pathway-specific ultrastructure of thalamocortical synapses in mouse somatosensory area s2 camkii drives synaptic maturation by coordinating spine remodeling and receptor segregation via liquid-liquid phase separation show more research articles neurobiology of disease the role of chaf1b in maintaining glioma stem cells stemness and regulating microglial polarization q neuron-induced hypothermia promotes functional recovery and suppresses neuroinflammation after brain injury behavioral timing of interictal spikes, but not rate, correlates with impaired working memory performance show more neurobiology of disease if (!window.adbutler){(function(){var s = document.createelement("script"); s.async = true; s.type = "text/javascript";s.src = 'https://servedbyadbutler.com/app.js';var n = document.getelementsbytagname("script")[0]; n.parentnode.insertbefore(s, n);}());} var adbutler = adbutler || {}; adbutler.ads = adbutler.ads || []; var abkw = window.abkw || ''; var plc540737 = window.plc540737 || 0; document.write(' '); adbutler.ads.push({handler: function(opt){ adbutler.register(183357, 540737, [160,600], 'placement_540737_'+opt.place, opt); }, opt: { place: plc540737++, keywords: abkw, domain: 'servedbyadbutler.com', click:'click_macro_placeholder' }}); home alerts follow sfn on bluesky visit society for neuroscience on facebook follow society for neuroscience on twitter follow society for neuroscience on linkedin visit society for neuroscience on youtube follow our rss feeds content early release current issue issue archive collections information for authors for advertisers for the media for subscribers about about the journal editorial board privacy notice contact accessibility copyright © 2025 by the society for neuroscience. jneurosci online issn: 1529-2401 the ideas and opinions expressed in jneurosci do not necessarily reflect those of sfn or the jneurosci editorial board. publication of an advertisement or other product mention in jneurosci should not be construed as an endorsement of the manufacturer’s claims. sfn does not assume any responsibility for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from or related to any use of any material contained in jneurosci . /* */## Scraping Notes- Successfully scraped from DOI.org