# Affective Contact in Autism: A Phenomenological Study of the Emotional Experiences of Autistic Adults.

**Authors:** ['AaronDallman']  
**Journal:** The American journal of occupational therapy : official publication of the American Occupational Therapy Association  
**Date:** 2024-06-26  
**DOI:** 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502  
**Category:** asd  
**Source:** pubmed  
**Scraped by:** agent_b  
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:33:54.842963  

## Abstract

Since the first descriptions of autism, difficulties with affective contact (e.g., interpersonal exchanges of feelings between individuals) have been considered a common feature of autism spectrum disorder, and these difficulties frequently manifest in occupational therapy interventions.
To (1) explore how autistic young adults describe their emotions and (2) suggest ways to improve the affective contact between autistic clients and their therapists.
Virtual focus group interviews.
Online (Qualtrics) survey and Zoom focus groups.
Autistic adults (N = 24) who met the following inclusion criteria: self-reported diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder or Asperger syndrome, age 18-35 yr, able to understand English, and able to participate in a focus group or individual interview using verbal or written communication.
Two themes were noted and are presented in this article: (1) Autistic people experience complex emotions and (2) autistic people's emotions are often (mis)measured and (mis)understood.
The findings indicate that autistic people experience diverse, complex, and intense emotions and that these are connected to occupation. This suggests that occupational therapists must be attuned to the emotional dimension of occupation when working with autistic clients and that autistic clients may benefit from the use of embodied language to reference their emotions. Occupational therapists can help autistic clients recognize their bodily changes when experiencing emotions and to better identify and regulate their emotions. The results also show that there were many cases nonautistic people misinterpreted the emotions of autistic people on the basis of their facial expressions or words. Plain-Language Summary: This article provides information about the emotional experiences of autistic people. The study found that autistic people experience complex emotions and that those emotions are often misinterpreted or misunderstood. The author provides information on how occupational therapists can use a neurodiversity-affirming and person-centered approach to support the emotional experiences of people in the autism community. Positionality Statement: In this article, identity-first language is used when referring to autistic adults. This deliberate choice aligns with the principles of the neurodiversity-affirming movement. Autistic self-advocates have indicated a preference for this style of language over person-first language. The author would also like to acknowledge their positionality. As both a neurodivergent researcher and a self-advocate for the disabled community, this style of language aligns with their own experiences of and beliefs about their disability.

## Full Text

Affective Contact in Autism: A Phenomenological Study of the Emotional Experiences of Autistic Adults - PubMed This site needs JavaScript to work properly. Please enable it to take advantage of the complete set of features! Clipboard, Search History, and several other advanced features are temporarily unavailable. Skip to main page content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation Search: Search Advanced Create alert Create RSS Clipboard User Guide Found 1 result for 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502 Save Email Send to Clipboard My BibliographyCollectionsCitation manager Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Save citation to file Format: Summary (text) PubMed PMID Abstract (text) CSV Create file Cancel Email citation Email address has not been verified. Go to My NCBI account settings to confirm your email and then refresh this page. To: Subject: Body: Format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) MeSH and other data Send email Cancel Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Add to My Bibliography My Bibliography Unable to load your delegates due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Your saved search Name of saved search: Search terms: 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502 Test search terms Would you like email updates of new search results? Saved Search Alert Radio Buttons Yes No Email: (change) Frequency: Monthly Weekly Daily Which day? The first Sunday The first Monday The first Tuesday The first Wednesday The first Thursday The first Friday The first Saturday The first day The first weekday Which day? Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Report format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) PubMed Send at most: 1 item 5 items 10 items 20 items 50 items 100 items 200 items Send even when there aren't any new results Optional text in email: Save Cancel Create a file for external citation management software Create file Cancel Your RSS Feed Name of RSS Feed: Number of items displayed: 5 10 15 20 50 100 Create RSS Cancel RSS Link Copy Full text links Silverchair Information Systems Full text links ActionsCiteCollectionsAdd to CollectionsCreate a new collectionAdd to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an errorPlease try again Add Cancel PermalinkPermalinkCopyDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Page navigation Title & authors Abstract MeSH terms LinkOut - more resources Title & authors Abstract MeSH terms LinkOut - more resources Filters applied. Clear filters Am J Occup Ther Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Jul 1;78(4):7804205070. doi: 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502. Affective Contact in Autism: A Phenomenological Study of the Emotional Experiences of Autistic Adults Aaron Dallman 1 Affiliations Expand Affiliation 1 Aaron Dallman, PhD, OTR/L, is Assistant Professor, Department of Rehabilitation and Movement Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark; ad1764@shp.rutgers.edu. PMID: 38923977 DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502 Item in Clipboard Affective Contact in Autism: A Phenomenological Study of the Emotional Experiences of Autistic Adults Aaron Dallman. Am J Occup Ther. 2024. Show details Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Am J Occup Ther Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Jul 1;78(4):7804205070. doi: 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502. Author Aaron Dallman 1 Affiliation 1 Aaron Dallman, PhD, OTR/L, is Assistant Professor, Department of Rehabilitation and Movement Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark; ad1764@shp.rutgers.edu. PMID: 38923977 DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2024.050502 Item in Clipboard Full text links CiteDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Abstract Importance: Since the first descriptions of autism, difficulties with affective contact (e.g., interpersonal exchanges of feelings between individuals) have been considered a common feature of autism spectrum disorder, and these difficulties frequently manifest in occupational therapy interventions. Objective: To (1) explore how autistic young adults describe their emotions and (2) suggest ways to improve the affective contact between autistic clients and their therapists. Design: Virtual focus group interviews. Setting: Online (Qualtrics) survey and Zoom focus groups. Participants: Autistic adults (N = 24) who met the following inclusion criteria: self-reported diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder or Asperger syndrome, age 18-35 yr, able to understand English, and able to participate in a focus group or individual interview using verbal or written communication. Results: Two themes were noted and are presented in this article: (1) Autistic people experience complex emotions and (2) autistic people's emotions are often (mis)measured and (mis)understood. Conclusions and relevance: The findings indicate that autistic people experience diverse, complex, and intense emotions and that these are connected to occupation. This suggests that occupational therapists must be attuned to the emotional dimension of occupation when working with autistic clients and that autistic clients may benefit from the use of embodied language to reference their emotions. Occupational therapists can help autistic clients recognize their bodily changes when experiencing emotions and to better identify and regulate their emotions. The results also show that there were many cases nonautistic people misinterpreted the emotions of autistic people on the basis of their facial expressions or words. Plain-Language Summary: This article provides information about the emotional experiences of autistic people. The study found that autistic people experience complex emotions and that those emotions are often misinterpreted or misunderstood. The author provides information on how occupational therapists can use a neurodiversity-affirming and person-centered approach to support the emotional experiences of people in the autism community. Positionality Statement: In this article, identity-first language is used when referring to autistic adults. This deliberate choice aligns with the principles of the neurodiversity-affirming movement. Autistic self-advocates have indicated a preference for this style of language over person-first language. The author would also like to acknowledge their positionality. As both a neurodivergent researcher and a self-advocate for the disabled community, this style of language aligns with their own experiences of and beliefs about their disability. Copyright © 2024 by the American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc. PubMed Disclaimer MeSH terms Adolescent Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Adult Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Autism Spectrum Disorder* / psychology Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Autistic Disorder / psychology Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Emotions* Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Female Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Focus Groups* Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Humans Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Male Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Occupational Therapy* / methods Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Professional-Patient Relations Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Qualitative Research Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Young Adult Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Ovid Technologies, Inc. Silverchair Information Systems Medical MedlinePlus Consumer Health Information MedlinePlus Health Information Research Materials NCI CPTC Antibody Characterization Program Miscellaneous NCI CPTAC Assay Portal Full text links [x] Silverchair Information Systems [x] Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Send To Clipboard Email Save My Bibliography Collections Citation Manager [x] NCBI Literature Resources MeSH PMC Bookshelf Disclaimer The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited. Follow NCBI Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Connect with NLM Twitter SM-Facebook SM-Youtube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov
