# Cortical gyrification predicts initial treatment response in adults with ADHD.

**DOI:** 10.1038/s41398-025-03681-0
**Journal:** Translational psychiatry
**Date:** 2025-10-18
**Authors:** ['JonathanLaatsch', 'FrederikeStein', 'SimonMaier', 'SwantjeMatthies', 'EstherSobanski', 'BarbaraAlm', 'LudgerTebartz van Elst', 'AxelKrug', 'AlexandraPhilipsen']
**Category:** adhd
**Source:** pubmed
**Scraped by:** agent_a
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:54:00.219020
**Source URL:** https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-025-03681-0

## Abstract

While the need for personalised treatment approaches grows in recognition, predicting treatment outcomes for adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) remains underexplored. Recent interest has turned to the brain's surface and its association with treatment response. Although the precise interplay between cortical gyrification and ADHD treatment outcomes remains to be elucidated, preliminary investigations suggest a promising avenue for diagnostic innovation. Expanding upon the Comparison of Methylphenidate and Psychotherapy in Adult ADHD Study (COMPAS), we investigated the prognostic value of cortical gyrification in predicting treatment response. Specifically, we explored how pre-treatment cortical gyrification might predict response to psychotherapy or clinical management in combination with either methylphenidate or placebo following a 12-week intensive treatment period. Cortical gyrification was assessed using 121 T1-weighted anatomical scans. Linear regression models investigated the predictive value of cortical gyrification, regressing baseline cortical structure against post-treatment severity. All brain structural analyses were conducted using the threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) approach and the Computational Anatomy Toolbox (CAT12) within the Statistical Parametric Mapping Software (Matlab Version R2021a). Results revealed significant positive region-specific associations between cortical gyrification and treatment response across three symptom dimensions, with significant associations localised predominantly in frontal regions of the left hemisphere. Our findings emphasise that increased cortical gyrification in frontal cortical regions signifies enhanced treatment efficacy following a 12-week intervention. Further research in this area is imperative to verify the reliability of biological markers in view of treatment success to potentially reduce unnecessary drug-related side-effects, minimising delay from receiving more effective treatments, and increase treatment adherence.

## Full Text Content

Download PDFArticleOpen accessPublished:17 October 2025Cortical gyrification predicts initial treatment response in adults with ADHDJonathan LaatschORCID:orcid.org/0009-0004-5557-88941,Frederike SteinORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-5052-60222,Simon MaierORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-7326-74223,Swantje MatthiesORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-0395-78823,Esther SobanskiORCID:orcid.org/0000-0001-7824-39594,5,Barbara Alm5,Ludger Tebartz van ElstORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-2274-54473,Axel KrugORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-0564-24971na1&…Alexandra PhilipsenORCID:orcid.org/0000-0001-6876-518X1na1Show authorsTranslational Psychiatryvolume15, Article number:406(2025)Cite this article230Accesses7AltmetricMetricsdetailsSubjectsADHDNeuroscienceAbstractWhile the need for personalised treatment approaches grows in recognition, predicting treatment outcomes for adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) remains underexplored. Recent interest has turned to the brain’s surface and its association with treatment response. Although the precise interplay between cortical gyrification and ADHD treatment outcomes remains to be elucidated, preliminary investigations suggest a promising avenue for diagnostic innovation. Expanding upon the Comparison of Methylphenidate and Psychotherapy in Adult ADHD Study (COMPAS), we investigated the prognostic value of cortical gyrification in predicting treatment response. Specifically, we explored how pre-treatment cortical gyrification might predict response to psychotherapy or clinical management in combination with either methylphenidate or placebo following a 12-week intensive treatment period. Cortical gyrification was assessed using 121 T1-weighted anatomical scans. Linear regression models investigated the predictive value of cortical gyrification, regressing baseline cortical structure against post-treatment severity. All brain structural analyses were conducted using the threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) approach and the Computational Anatomy Toolbox (CAT12) within the Statistical Parametric Mapping Software (Matlab Version R2021a). Results revealed significant positive region-specific associations between cortical gyrification and treatment response across three symptom dimensions, with significant associations localised predominantly in frontal regions of the left hemisphere. Our findings emphasise that increased cortical gyrification in frontal cortical regions signifies enhanced treatment efficacy following a 12-week intervention. Further research in this area is imperative to verify the reliability of biological markers in view of treatment success to potentially reduce unnecessary drug-related side-effects, minimising delay from receiving more effective treatments, and increase treatment adherence.Similar content being viewed by othersCortical alterations associated with lower response to methylphenidate in adults with ADHDArticleOpen access01 April 2024Prognostic associations of cortical gyrification in minimally medicated schizophrenia in an early intervention settingArticleOpen access29 October 2022Beyond out-of-sample: robust and generalizable multivariate neuroanatomical patterns of psychiatric problems in youthArticle30 November 2024IntroductionWhile historically considered a neurodevelopmental disorder confined to childhood, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) persistently impacts up to 60% of individuals into adulthood [1,2]. Characterised by its intrinsic heterogeneity, ADHD manifests itself across a spectrum of severity among those affected. Patients present distinct manifestations of symptom domains, aetiologies, developmental trajectories, and response to treatment [3,4].Effective management of ADHD in adults often necessitates a multifaceted approach, encompassing both pharmaco- and psychotherapeutic interventions. Although the administration of stimulants (e.g., methylphenidate) and nonstimulants (e.g., atomoxetine) has been demonstrated to reduce core ADHD symptoms in the short term [5,6,7,8], the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy varies considerably. Approximately 30% of patients do not respond to pharmacotherapy and the inter-individual variability in tolerability of associated side effects often results in discontinuation of medication [9,10]. Where patients respond, the benefit of pharmacologic treatment may decline over time [11,12], demonstrating the necessity of other strategies to improve the functional outcomes of patients.Alongside pharmacotherapy, numerous nonpharmacological interventions have been introduced for adults with ADHD. Among others, these approaches include cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), psychoeducation, emotional regulation therapy, mindfulness therapy, and neurofeedback [13]. Nevertheless, previous systematic reviews and meta-analyses on the efficacy of psychotherapy on ADHD core symptoms [14,15,16], internalising symptoms [17,18] and emotional regulation [19] yielded inconclusive results with either small or modest effects due to limited sample size or methodology (i.e., open-label studies). Recently, however, a meta-analysis by Liu et al. [20] focusing on previous methodological shortcomings arrived at a more definitive conclusion regarding the effectiveness of CBT in adults with ADHD. First, CBT significantly reduced the severity of both core ADHD symptoms and emotional symptoms, with medium to large effect sizes. Second, ADHD severity total scores, inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity symptoms were significantly lower after CBT. Third, the reduction in ADHD symptoms correlated with an improvement of quality of life. Together, these findings suggest that CBT is a promising strategy for adults with ADHD in its ability to offer symptom remission and improved life quality.In the light of precision medicine, there have been only few studies aiming to predict treatment success in ADHD [21]. For this reason, there is currently no clear evidence to guide decision making about who will tolerate and/or respond best to which treatment approach. Presently, it is not possible to predict course or outcome at the level of the individual patient [22]. The inherent complexity and diversity within ADHD pose significant challenges to predicting treatment efficacy. Still, some research groups tried to detect biological predictors of psychostimulant treatment response in adults affected by ADHD [23,24,25,26]. Among the findings that significantly predicted treatment response to psychostimulants were genetic markers [27], task-based- [28] and structural neuroimaging markers [25], neurophysiological- [29] as well as electrophysiological markers [30], constructing a complex and diverse clinical picture [23]. Even though these results may be promising for improving diagnostic accuracy, additional research will have to verify the reliability of the different biological markers in view of the complex pathophysiology of ADHD [23].While attempts have been made to predict treatment response to pharmacotherapy, research investigating biological predictors of treatment response to psychotherapy in adults with ADHD has yet to begin. This is despite substantial evidence to suggest that such predictors may indeed exist. Psychological interventions have the capacity to modify brain function across various psychopathological conditions [31]. First, research suggests that changes in brain function following psychotherapy correlate with symptom improvement [32]. Second, psychotherapy can lead to normalisation of brain structure and function in patients with conditions such as obsessive compulsive disorder, depression, or schizophrenia [33,34,35]. Third, comparisons between neurobiological changes post-psychological treatment and those following pharmacological treatment reveal that psychotherapy can have effects on brain function comparable to medication, though not universally across all disorders [31]. While direct evidence may be lacking, the existing body of research strongly implies a significant relationship between psychotherapy and neurobiological changes, highlighting the potential for further investigation in this area.Recently, there has been increasing interest toward exploring the brain surface as predictor of treatment outcomes across a variety of psychiatric conditions [36,37,38]. Especially local cortical gyrification and the overall gyrification index (GI) have received most attention. Nevertheless, research investigating the GI in relation to ADHD in adulthood are notably scarce and yielded inconclusive results. Ambrosino et al. [39] found decreased cortical folding in the left rostral middle frontal cortex and right pars opercularis, and Mous et al. [40] reported increased gyrification in the left medial temporal lobe. Contrastingly, neither Forde et al. [41], Shaw et al. [42] and Gharehgazlou et al. [43], nor our research group [44] report differences in either global or local gyrification between patients with ADHD and healthy controls. Such inconsistencies likely reflect both methodological variability and sample heterogeneity. Differences in imaging protocols, including the choice of smoothing parameters, and whether gyrification is assessed local or globally can substantially influence outcomes. Moreover, variability in sample characteristics such as age distribution, comorbidity profiles, ADHD subtypes, and prior treatment exposure may further contribute to variability across studies. Although the general consensus holds that the GI remains relatively stable after the third trimester of pregnancy [45], more recent work by White et al. [46] propose that the GI may also undergo significant modulation during adolescence and maturity into early adulthood. In this light, cortical gyrification may not only reflect early neurodevelopmental processes, but also serve as a dynamic marker with potential utility in predicting treatment response. In fact, there have been prognostic studies on the relationship between cortical gyrification and psychotic disorders predicting treatment response [36,37], subsequent recurrence in patients with first-episode schizophrenia [47] or conversion to psychosis [48,49]. Studies in adults with ADHD, however, are yet to be conducted but may hold promising diagnostic value.Based on the considerations given above, the present study investigated whether alterations in cortical gyrification hold prognostic value in predicting treatment response in adults with ADHD. Expanding upon our prior work [50] within the framework of the Comparison of Methylphenidate and Psychotherapy in Adult ADHD Study (COMPAS) cohort, we explored cortical gyrification in relation to treatment response following a 12-week intervention period, both across the entire sample and within each treatment group. COMPAS was the first, and so far largest, multi-centre randomised clinical study that evaluated the effects of group psychotherapy (GPT) compared with clinical management (CM) combined with methylphenidate (MPH) or placebo (PLA) in adults with ADHD [51,52,53]. In pursuit of adequately addressing the complexity of neuroanatomical variability, we applied the threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) approach. By addressing key limitations of voxel-based morphometry, TFCE enables the detection of both spatially diffuse and sharply localized structural changes while maintaining strict control over family-wise error [54]. Its sensitivity to nuanced structural patterns has solidified its utility in capturing neuroanatomical variability, particularly in studies of neurodevelopmental disorders [55]. Within this methodological and clinical framework, our objective offers the potential to discern individuals prone to suboptimal treatment responses before the commencement of MPH prescription or the initiation of psychotherapeutic interventions. Such initiatives bear clinical significance to reduce unnecessary drug-related side-effects, minimising delay from receiving more effective treatments, and patient discouragement. Given the limited research available on predicting treatment response in adults with ADHD, encompassing both pharmacological- and psychotherapeutic intervention in relation to cortical gyrification, we will explore gyrification without predefined hypotheses. Nonetheless, based on existing research in schizophrenia [36,37], we anticipate a positive relationship between treatment response and cortical gyrification.Methods and materialsEthical considerationsThe study obtained ethical approval from the Ethics Commission of the University Medical Center Freiburg (Approval ID: 217/06) and additional authorisation from the German authorities for pharmacological trials (EudraCT No.: 2006-000222-31), adhering to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki [56]. Subsequently, the trial was registered with Current Controlled Trials (ISRCTN54096201). Prior to participation, all individuals provided written informed consent. Details of the eligibility criteria for study participation can be found in thesupplemental material, TableS1. Patient recruitment took place between January 2007 and August 2010, with the study treatment concluding in August 2011.Treatment groupsThe COMPAS trial employed a four-arm, randomised, multicentre design to investigate the efficacy of psychotherapy and pharmacological treatment in adults with ADHD. Diagnoses were confirmed via expert psychiatric assessment and validated using structured clinical interviews and rating scales. A total of 419 participants were randomized into one of four treatment conditions: (1) GPT & MPH, (2) GPT & PLA, (3) CM & MPH, or (4) CM & PLA. GPT followed a manualised, evidence-based protocol, delivered weekly for 12 weeks and monthly thereafter for 10 additional sessions. CM served as an active control condition simulating routine psychiatric care of nondirective supportive counselling on the basis of individual sessions lasting 15–20 min. Methylphenidate was titrated over six weeks up to a maximum of 60 mg/day. Treatments were assigned in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, with blinding for medication and open allocation for GPT vs. CM. Observers rating symptom outcomes were blinded to treatment allocation. Treatment fidelity was ensured through session recordings and independent expert reviews.ParticipantsBuilding on the foundation of our prior publication [50], we conducted this study with the identical cohort of research participants previously outlined in detail.Among the 196 patients who consented to the imaging study, 46 were excluded prior to image acquisition due to withdrawal of consent, noncompliance, discontinuation of study participation, scheduling difficulties, claustrophobia, or the presence of contraindicating implants. Hence, T1-weighted images of 150 patients were acquired. Nevertheless, among the initial 150 patients who granted consent for the imaging study, only 123 continued the study until week 13. Subsequently, one patient was retrospectively excluded for above threshold psychometric documentation on the main assessment of ADHD symptomatology (e.g., outlier). Another patient was excluded to ensure homogeneity of MRI data quality. The final sample available for analysis consisted of 121 MRI data sets. Within this sample, 58 patients were treated with MPH while 63 received PLA, with 59 undergoing GPT and 62 enrolled in CM. FigureS1displays the flowchart of participant selection (seeSupplemental Material). Table1summarises the demographic characteristics of the full sample. TablesS2–4address psychometric data as well as group differences at baseline and treatment effects over time (seeSupplemental Material).Table 1 Demographic and psychometric data for the full patient sample.Full size tableAssessment of symptomatologyADHD-related symptomatology was assessed using the observer-rated German version of the Conners’ Adult ADHD Rating Scale (CAARS) [57]. The questionnaire contains 66-items that are graded on a Likert scale from 0 (not at all) to 3 (severely). It is available in both, a self-report and observer-rated form (CAARS S:L/ CAARS O:L) and addresses four primary factors of symptoms: inattention/cognitive problems, hyperactivity/restlessness, impulsivity/emotional lability, and issues with self-concept [58]. For more information regarding the CAARS questionnaire, cf. [58,59,60]. For this study, we chose to focus primarily on the CAARS O:L to assess treatment response in order to avoid response- or social desirability biases.MRI data acquisition and Pre-processingA detailed description of the MRI data acquisition and pre-processing can be found in our prior work [50]. Briefly, MRI scans were solely performed at the study centre located in Freiburg. MRI data were preprocessed using the default parameters integrated in the CAT12 Toolbox (Computation Anatomy Toolbox for SPM, build 12.7 r1720,http://dbm.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat/), building on SPM12 v7771 (Statistical Parametric Mapping), providing bias-corrected, tissue classified, and normalised data ratings. Images were spatially registered, segmented, and normalised using a DARTEL algorithm [61,62,63]. GI parameter estimation involved fully-automated methods projecting local maxima to other grey matter voxels using a neighbour relationship defined by the white matter distance [64]. Quality control of processed data was applied as implemented in CAT12, controlling for noise, inhomogeneity and resolution. Subsequently, the T1-MRI data sets were spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum of 20 mm.Statistical analysesDemographic and psychometric data were obtained using SPSS software, version 27 (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York, USA). Separate multivariate analyses using one-way MANCOVAs were used to assess baseline symptomatology. Baseline effect analyses defined the subscales of the CAARS O:L as dependent variables, with the treatment condition (e.g., GPT/ CM, MPH/ PLA) as independent variable. Group- and time effects were investigated using separate general linear model repeated measures analyses of covariance incorporating within-subject factor ‘Time’ and between-subject factor ‘Treatment’. Here, the dependent variables also corresponded to the subscales of the CAARS O:L. Both, ‘Treatment’ and ‘Time’ included two levels: ‘Treatment’ was defined by the specific treatment condition, and ‘Time’ reflected baseline versus post-treatment scores after 12 weeks. Age and sex served as covariates in all analyses. Post hoc analyses were conducted where appropriate to further explore significant findings. All analyses were corrected for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni adjustments and significance was set top< 0.05.For the primary analyses, all brain structural analyses using T1-weighted images were performed using the CAT12 toolbox for SPM12 Version 7771 under Matlab Version R2021a (MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts, USA). We used separate linear regression analyses to investigate correlations between treatment response and the GI, both for the whole sample and at a subgroup level. Treatment response was operationalised by computing the change between the scores across the eight subscales of the CAARS O:L of week 0 and week 13. For the subgroup analyses, the total sample was divided into two treatment groups based on the active treatment condition (MPH or GPT). The groups were designed to account for variables not of primary interest, effectively cancelling out their influence and enabling a focused evaluation of the specific treatment effects. Age and sex were controlled for by including them as covariate of no interest. Absolute threshold masking was set to a threshold value of 0.1. Subsequently, TFCE with 5000 permutations for GLM contrast generation was utilised for further analysis, testing for both positive and negative correlations. Clusters identified in the surface parameter analyses were labelled using the Desikan-Killiany atlas [65]. Statistical significance was determined at cluster threshold extend ofk> 35 andp< 0.05 family wise error (FWE)-corrected (combined peak-cluster-level), controlling for multiple comparisons.ResultsTotal sampleIndependent of treatment modality, linear regression analyses showed positive associations between Total Score, Hyperactivity, Self-Concept, DSM Hyperactivity/Impulsivity, DSM Total Score and the GI located predominantly in frontal structures of the left hemisphere (see Table2and Figs.1–5). There were no statistically significant correlations between Inattention, its DSM index, or Impulsivity and the GI [all associatedTFCEvalues < 5982.85, FWE-corrected peak-cluster levelp> 0.088].Fig. 1: Positive association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L Total Score Change (Weeks 0–13).Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageFig. 2: Positive association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L Hyperactivity Change (Weeks 0–13).Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageFig. 3: Positive association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L Self-Concept Change (Weeks 0–13).Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageFig. 4: Positive association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L DSM Hyperactivity/Impulsivity Change (Weeks 0–13).Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageFig. 5: Positive association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L DSM Total Score Change (Weeks 0–13).Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageTable 2 Associations of cortical gyrification index and changes in ADHD-related psychopathology (Weeks 0–13), measured by the CAARS O:L for n = 121, at p < 0.05, TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size tableMPH groupAmong patients receiving MPH, Hyperactivity was negatively associated with GI in the left rostral middle frontal gyrus (see Table3and Fig.6). FigureS1illustrates the directionality of effects through trend lines, highlighting the relationship between GI and treatment outcomes across both treatment groups (seeSupplemental Material). There was no significant group effect on ADHD-related symptom alleviation [F (8, 110) = 1.458,p= 0.181, partial η2= 0.096, Wilk’s Λ = 0.904] nor were there any significant associations between Total Score, Inattention, Impulsivity, Self-Concept, and related DSM-Indexes and the GI in relation to treatment with MPH [all associatedTFCEvalues < 4332.38, FWE-corrected peak-cluster levelp> 0.184].Fig. 6: Negative association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L Hyperactivity Change (Weeks 0–13) for methylphenidate treatment.Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageTable 3 Associations of cortical gyrification index and Hyperactivity Change (Weeks 0–13) in the methylphenidate subgroup (n = 121) measured by the CAARS O:L at p < 0.05, TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size tableGPT groupIn patients undergoing GPT, linear regression analyses showed a negative association between Inattention and GI located predominantly in the right precuneus and the paracentral gyrus (see Table4and Fig.7). FigureS2demonstrates the direction of effects using trend lines, highlighting the association between gyrification index and treatment outcomes across both treatment groups (seeSupplemental Information). There was a significant group effect on overall symptom reduction [F (8, 110) = 2.476,p= 0.017, partial η2= 0.153, Wilk’s Λ = 0.847]. CM was superior to GPT in reducing the total number of ADHD-related symptoms, symptoms of inattention and symptoms of impulsivity. There were no statistically significant relationships between Total Score, Hyperactivity, Impulsivity, Self-Concept and related DSM-Indexes and the GI [all associatedTFCEvalues < 4077.74, FWE-corrected peak-cluster levelp> 0.21].Fig. 7: Negative association between cortical gyrification and CAARS O:L Inattention Change (Weeks 0–13) for the psychotherapy subgroup.Cluster of significant positive correlation at p < 0.05 after TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size imageTable 4 Associations of cortical gyrification index and Inattention Change (Weeks 0–13) in the psychotherapy subgroup (n = 121) measured by the CAARS O:L at p < 0.05, TFCE, FWE-corrected combined peak-cluster level.Full size tableDiscussionWhile the importance of personalised treatment approaches is increasingly acknowledged, predicting treatment outcomes for adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) remains insufficiently explored. This study aimed to address this gap by investigating the prognostic value of cortical gyrification on initial treatment response following 12 weeks of treatment with GPT or CM combined with either MPH or PLA in adults with ADHD. Independent of treatment modality, we showed significant positive associations of cortical gyrification in frontal structures in the left hemisphere with overall ADHD symptom alleviation across three symptom dimensions. Treatment-specific effects showed superiority of CM in overall symptom reduction compared to GPT. Furthermore, distinct patterns of baseline gyrification predicted treatment response. Lower baseline gyrification in the (left) rostral middle frontal gyrus was associated with greater improvement in hyperactivity when treated with MPH, while reduced gyrification in the (right) precuneus, paracentral gyrus and superior parietal gyrus led to greater reduction of inattention when undergoing GPT.In the primary analyses of the COMPAS study [52], we previously demonstrated that GPT and CM were similarly effective in reducing ADHD symptomatology over a 12-week period, with MPH showing superiority across almost all outcome domains. In our MRI subsample of the COMPAS cohort, these findings were not replicated. While a significant time effect indicated that all treatments contributed to a reduction in ADHD core symptomatology, group effects revealed a nuanced pattern. CM was more effective than GPT in reducing ADHD symptoms, while MPH did not outperform PLA. This discrepancy may be attributed to a strong placebo effect and the nature of CM that included face-to-face counselling activities. Potentially CM addressed individual patient needs better than group psychotherapy. Although MPH did not demonstrate statistical superiority over PLA, there was a notable trend indicating a greater effect of MPH compared to PLA.To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has yet investigated the relationship between the GI of the cortex and subsequent treatment response independent of pharmacological or psychological intervention in ADHD. Hence, a direct comparison to existing literature is precluded. Moreover, there is only limited evidence for gyrification abnormalities in ADHD due to a scarcity in studies conducted. Pertaining to the evidence that is available and that was highlighted previously, Ambrosino et al. [39] reported decreased cortical folding in the left rostral middle frontal cortex and right pars opercularis, while Mous et al. [40] showed increased gyrification in the left medial temporal lobe in patients with ADHD. Conversely, Forde et al. [41], Shaw et al. [42], and Gharehgazlou et al. [43], did not report differences in either global or local gyrification between patients with ADHD and healthy controls. In addition, our research group could neither provide evidence for a difference in cortical gyrification between adult patients and controls [44]. Nevertheless, while there is only limited evidence highlighting gyrification abnormalities in ADHD, there may be evidence that left rostral middle frontal cortex gyrification may be shared by both ADHD and suboptimal treatment response [39].While VBM and surface-based morphometric approaches are not directly comparable, our findings may be discussed in the context of previous studies suggesting that diminished grey matter tissue or cortical thickness in frontal structures is associated with poor treatment response [66,67]. In a naturalistic study with 107 children diagnosed with ADHD, Shaw et al. [67] reported that a thinner left medial prefrontal cortex at baseline was associated with less favourable clinical outcomes, while greater cortical thickness in this region was linked to greater symptom reduction. Parlatini et al. [66] showed that adult non-responders to MPH treatment for 2 months had lower cortical volume and surface area in the right lateral orbital frontal cortex, the right rostral middle frontal gyrus and right caudal middle frontal gyrus in comparison to responders. Interestingly, Yang et al. [68] highlighted that the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex showed distributed patterns of functional connectivity across the entire brain that were altered by 3-week psychostimulants and were associated with symptom improvement. Nevertheless, given the scarcity of literature on cortical gyrification in ADHD, particularly predicting treatment success, further research is imperative to expand our understanding of frontal cortical gyrification in ADHD and its role in predicting treatment success. This need for further investigation gains additional relevance in the light that we show conflicting treatment-specific results in response to MPH and GPT treatment.Lower baseline cortical gyrification in the rostral middle frontal gyrus was negatively associated with reduction in symptoms of hyperactivity when treated with MPH. Though initially counterintuitive, this observation aligns with concept of an inverted-U-shaped dose-response curve for MPH [69,70], implicating that the same quantity of MPH may lead to domain specific symptom alleviation but may increase symptom burden in another. Thus, increased cortical gyrification in frontal structures on the left hemisphere may predispose patients to experience overall symptom alleviation in response to MPH, but increased cortical gyrification in the left rostral middle frontal gyrus may instead exacerbate hyperactivity symptoms.Baseline cortical gyrification in the (right) precuneus, paracentral gyrus und superiorparietal cortex was also negatively associated with symptoms of inattention in patients undergoing GPT. We previously showed a negative association between cortical gyrification in a cluster combining the (right) pre-, para-, and postcentral gyri with extension to the precuneus and symptoms of inattention [50]. Here we extend on this finding, showing that cortical gyrification of the (right) precuneus and paracentral gyrus is not only negatively correlated with symptoms of inattention, but that it may also lead to patients receiving less symptom alleviation from psychotherapy. Given that psychological interventions can influence both brain function [31] and -structure [33,34,35], patients with a less structurally complex (right) precuneus and paracentral gyri prior to therapy may exhibit greater plasticity. Consequently, patients may achieve more substantial improvements in attention compared to those with higher cortical complexity and lower plasticity. Nevertheless, given the limited body of evidence surrounding cortical gyrification in adults with ADHD and its predictive value of treatment success, all hypotheses about the interaction of MPH and GPT in combination with cortical gyrification to predict treatment response warrant further investigation and validation.Still, our findings fit the hypothesis that abnormal brain gyrification, likely as a consequence of a more severe disruption of neurodevelopmental processes, may predispose patients to derive less from treatment, dependent and independent of treatment that is being received. The most prominent cortical folding changes occur during the third trimester of pregnancy, but gyrification continues to change in different ways throughout the first decades of life [71]. Disruption of neurodevelopmental processes caused by genetic or environmental influences may lead to abnormal cortical gyrification predisposing individuals to psychiatric conditions [72]. Hence, cortical gyrification may not only serve as a marker of integrity of normal cortical development [36,38,73,74], but may also hold promise in characterising subgroups of patients with low response to treatments [36].Cortical gyrification, especially in frontal regions, may offer valuable insights, as greater gyrification in adults’ bilateral medial and superior frontal cortex has been linked to better working memory and mental flexibility task performance [75,76]. Gregory et al. [77] showed that in healthy adults, higher general cognitive ability was positively associated with local gyrification index in several brain regions, including the lateral prefrontal cortex, cingulate, insular cortices, inferior parietal lobule, temporoparietal junction regions, and fusiform gyrus. Specifically, the lateral prefrontal cortex appears as a pivotal region, as its functional connectivity and structure have been implicated in general cognitive control [78], overall intelligence [79], and various executive functions [80]. Pertaining to our results of cortical gyrification in frontal regions of the left hemisphere, one potential interpretation is that individuals with higher cognitive ability might derive greater benefit from therapy. Pharmaco- and/or psychotherapy may empower patients to leverage cognitive ability to address life circumstances that were previously challenging due to lack of guidance or ability. While personal agency significantly influence psychological well-being throughout life [81], neurocognition has also been associated with treatment response in ADHD [82,83]. Neurocognition and frontal cortical gyrification as treatment predictors would be of great importance for the identification of patients with suboptimal response to standard treatments.LimitationsGiven the scarcity of studies exploring treatment response in adults with ADHD, it is currently premature to draw definitive conclusions. A cohesive understanding of abnormalities in cortical gyrification in ADHD patients has yet to emerge. Anatomical studies on treatment response have produced heterogeneous results, reporting instances of hyper-gyrification, hypo-gyrification or a complex combination affecting both the cortex and subcortical structures [25,84]. Consequently, validating our findings with previous reports is challenging. Moreover, translating these findings clinical practice remains inherently challenging, as the utility of cortical gyrification as a predictive biomarker is constrained by considerable interindividual variability in symptom manifestations, developmental neuroplasticity, and the profound heterogeneity of ADHD’s neurobiological architecture, highlighting the need for replication in larger and more diverse cohorts before meaningful clinical implementation can be achieved. Additionally, although all results have been corrected for multiple comparison within the analysis, no correction for multiple testing across all analyses was applied. After implementing correction for multiple testing across all analyses, only the cluster identified for self-concept retains statistical significance. Finally, while TFCE statistical approaches have demonstrated increased sensitivity in detecting significant results, the method has also been shown to induce more spatial bias [85].Future directionsFurther investigation into treatment response in adults with ADHD is essential and warranted to validate our findings. Multimodal studies integrating functional data with structural abnormalities hold promise for gaining a more comprehensive understanding of the intricate relationship between cortical and functional irregularities and symptom manifestation and persistence. In this context, machine learning approaches may prove valuable in identifying predictive cortical markers prior to treatment initiation, thereby improving treatment stratification, reducing unnecessary delays in administering individualised treatment, and mitigate patient discouragement. Prolonged treatment durations coupled with multiple longitudinal anatomical scans may further aid in revealing additional biomarkers associated with treatment response. Additionally, exploring the interplay of neurocognition with (in)dependent treatment response could inform more personalised treatment strategies. Investigating the potential role of genetic markers in moderating treatment outcomes may also further enhance our understanding of treatment response heterogeneity in ADHD. Lastly, longitudinal studies tracking treatment response over extended periods and across different stages of adulthood could elucidate the long-term effectiveness and durability of interventions.Data availabilityThe data will be made available from the corresponding author [JL] upon reasonable request. The data is not publicly available due to privacy and ethical restrictions.ReferencesChandra S, Biederman J, Faraone SV. Assessing the validity of the age at onset criterion for diagnosing ADHD in DSM-5. J Atten Disord. 2021;25:143–53.https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054716629717.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSalari N, Ghasemi H, Abdoli N, Rahmani A, Shiri MH, Hashemian AH, et al. The global prevalence of ADHD in children and adolescents: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ital J Pediatr. 2023;49:48.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-023-01456-1.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLuo Y, Weibman D, Halperin JM, Li X. A review of heterogeneity in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Front Hum Neurosci. 2019;13:42.https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00042.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPosner J, Polanczyk GV, Sonuga-Barke E. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Lancet. 2020;395:450–62.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)33004-1.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarAnbarasan D, Safyer G, Adler LA. Updates in pharmacologic strategies in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N. Am. 2022;31:553–68.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2022.03.008.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarBuoli M, Serati M, Cahn W. Alternative pharmacological strategies for adult ADHD treatment: a systematic review. Expert Rev Neurother. 2016;16:131–44.https://doi.org/10.1586/14737175.2016.1135735.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarCortese S, Adamo N, Del Giovane C, Mohr-Jensen C, Hayes AJ, Carucci S, et al. Comparative efficacy and tolerability of medications for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children, adolescents, and adults: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5:727–38.https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(18)30269-4.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCastells X, Ramos-Quiroga JA, Rigau D, Bosch R, Nogueira M, Vidal X, et al. Efficacy of methylphenidate for adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: a meta-regression analysis. CNS Drugs. 2011;25:157–69.https://doi.org/10.2165/11539440-000000000-00000.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarSchein J, Childress A, Cloutier M, Desai U, Chin A, Simes M, et al. Reasons for treatment changes in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a chart review study. BMC Psychiatry. 2022;22:377.https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-022-04016-9.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarShim S-H, Yoon H-J, Bak J, Hahn S-W, Kim Y-K. Clinical and neurobiological factors in the management of treatment refractory attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2016;70:237–44.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2016.04.007.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarAdler LA, Solanto M, Escobar R, Lipsius S, Upadhyaya H. Executive functioning outcomes over 6 months of atomoxetine for adults with ADHD: relationship to maintenance of response and relapse over the subsequent 6 months after treatment. J Atten Disord. 2020;24:363–72.https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054716664411.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSwanson JM, Arnold LE, Molina BSG, Sibley MH, Hechtman LT, Hinshaw SP, et al. Young adult outcomes in the follow-up of the multimodal treatment study of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: symptom persistence, source discrepancy, and height suppression. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2017;58:663–78.https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12684.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarWeibel S, Menard O, Ionita A, Boumendjel M, Cabelguen C, Kraemer C, et al. Practical considerations for the evaluation and management of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in adults. Encephale. 2020;46:30–40.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.encep.2019.06.005.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarDe Crescenzo F, Cortese S, Adamo N, Janiri L. Pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment of adults with ADHD: a meta-review. Evid Based Ment Health. 2017;20:4–11.https://doi.org/10.1136/eb-2016-102415.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarKnouse LE, Teller J, Brooks MA. Meta-analysis of cognitive-behavioral treatments for adult ADHD. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2017;85:737–50.https://doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000216.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarYoung Z, Moghaddam N, Tickle A. The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for adults with ADHD: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Atten Disord. 2020;24:875–88.https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054716664413.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarLopez PL, Torrente FM, Ciapponi A, Lischinsky AG, Cetkovich-Bakmas M, Rojas JI, et al. Cognitive-behavioural interventions for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;3:CD010840.https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010840.pub2.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarLópez-Pinar C, Martínez-Sanchís S, Carbonell-Vayá E, Sánchez-Meca J, Fenollar-Cortés J. Efficacy of nonpharmacological treatments on comorbid internalizing symptoms of adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analytic review. J Atten Disord. 2020;24:456–78.https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054719855685.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGuo C, Assumpcao L, Hu Z. Efficacy of non-pharmacological treatments on emotional symptoms of children and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analysis. J Atten Disord. 2022;26:508–24.https://doi.org/10.1177/10870547211001953.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarLiu C-I, Hua M-H, Lu M-L, Goh KK. Effectiveness of cognitive behavioural-based interventions for adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder extends beyond core symptoms: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Psychol Psychother. 2023;96:543–59.https://doi.org/10.1111/papt.12455.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarCao M, Martin E, Li X. Machine learning in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: new approaches toward understanding the neural mechanisms. Transl Psychiatry. 2023;13:236.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-023-02536-w.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBuitelaar J, Bölte S, Brandeis D, Caye A, Christmann N, Cortese S, et al. Toward precision medicine in ADHD. Front Behav Neurosci. 2022;16:900981https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2022.900981.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCapuzzi E, Caldiroli A, Auxilia AM, Borgonovo R, Capellazzi M, Clerici M, et al. Biological predictors of treatment response in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): a systematic review. J Pers Med. 2022;12:1742https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm12101742.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarParlatini V, Radua J, Solanes Font A, Wichers R, Maltezos S, Sanefuji M, et al. Poor response to methylphenidate is associated with a smaller dorsal attentive network in adult Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Transl Psychiatry. 2023;13:303.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-023-02598-w.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarChang J-C, Lin H-Y, Lv J, Tseng W-YI, Gau SS-F. Regional brain volume predicts response to methylphenidate treatment in individuals with ADHD. BMC Psychiatry. 2021;21:26.https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-021-03040-5.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarHung Y, Green A, Kelberman C, Gaillard S, Capella J, Rudberg N, et al. Neural and cognitive predictors of stimulant treatment efficacy in Medication-Naïve ADHD adults: a pilot diffusion tensor imaging study. J Atten Disord. 2024;28:936–44.https://doi.org/10.1177/10870547231222261.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDa Silva BS, Cupertino RB, Rovaris DL, Schuch JB, Kappel DB, Müller D, et al. Exocytosis-related genes and response to methylphenidate treatment in adults with ADHD. Mol Psychiatry. 2018;23:1446–52.https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2017.90.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarSugimoto A, Suzuki Y, Yoshinaga K, Orime N, Hayashi T, Egawa J, et al. Influence of atomoxetine on relationship between ADHD symptoms and prefrontal cortex activity during task execution in adult patients. Front Hum Neurosci. 2021;15:755025.https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2021.755025.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDuval F, Erb A, Mokrani M-C, Weiss T, Carcangiu R. First-dose methylphenidate-induced changes in the anti-saccade task performance and outcome in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Psychiatr Res Clin Pr. 2021;3:146–52.https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.prcp.20210010.ArticleGoogle ScholarStrauß M, Reif A, Ulke C, Paucke M, Sander C, Hegerl U, et al. Is brain arousal regulation a predictor of response to psychostimulant therapy in adult ADHD patients?. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2020;270:1073–76.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-019-01085-y.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarBarsaglini A, Sartori G, Benetti S, Pettersson-Yeo W, Mechelli A. The effects of psychotherapy on brain function: a systematic and critical review. Prog Neurobiol. 2014;114:1–14.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.10.006.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarPrasko J, Horácek J, Záleský R, Kopecek M, Novák T, Pasková B, et al. The change of regional brain metabolism (18FDG PET) in panic disorder during the treatment with cognitive behavioral therapy or antidepressants. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2004;25:340–48.PubMedGoogle ScholarSaxena S, Gorbis E, O’Neill J, Baker SK, Mandelkern MA, Maidment KM, et al. Rapid effects of brief intensive cognitive-behavioral therapy on brain glucose metabolism in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Mol Psychiatry. 2009;14:197–205.https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4002134.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarYoshimura S, Okamoto Y, Onoda K, Matsunaga M, Okada G, Kunisato Y, et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy for depression changes medial prefrontal and ventral anterior cingulate cortex activity associated with self-referential processing. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014;9:487–93.https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst009.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarKumari V, Fannon D, Peters ER, Ffytche DH, Sumich AL, Premkumar P, et al. Neural changes following cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis: a longitudinal study. Brain. 2011;134:2396–407.https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr154.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPalaniyappan L, Marques TR, Taylor H, Handley R, Mondelli V, Bonaccorso S, et al. Cortical folding defects as markers of poor treatment response in first-episode psychosis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013;70:1031–40.https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.203.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarYunzhi P, Chen X, Chen E, Lee E, Zhening L, Ouyang X, et al. Prognostic associations of cortical gyrification in minimally medicated schizophrenia in an early intervention setting. Schizophrenia (Heidelb). 2022;8:88https://doi.org/10.1038/s41537-022-00296-y.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarFavaro A, Tenconi E, Degortes D, Manara R, Santonastaso P. Gyrification brain abnormalities as predictors of outcome in anorexia nervosa. Hum Brain Mapp. 2015;36:5113–22.https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22998.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarAmbrosino S, de Zeeuw P, Wierenga LM, van Dijk S, Durston S. What can cortical development in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder teach us about the early developmental mechanisms involved?. Cereb Cortex. 2017;27:4624–34.https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhx182.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMous SE, Karatekin C, Kao C-Y, Gottesman II, Posthuma D, White T. Gyrification differences in children and adolescents with velocardiofacial syndrome and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a pilot study. Psychiatry Res. 2014;221:169–71.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2013.12.002.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarForde NJ, Ronan L, Zwiers MP, Alexander-Bloch AF, Faraone SV, Oosterlaan J, et al. No association between cortical gyrification or intrinsic curvature and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in adolescents and young adults. Front Neurosci. 2017;11:218https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00218.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarShaw P, Malek M, Watson B, Sharp W, Evans A, Greenstein D. Development of cortical surface area and gyrification in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2012;72:191–97.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.01.031.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGharehgazlou A, Vandewouw M, Ziolkowski J, Wong J, Crosbie J, Schachar R, et al. Cortical gyrification morphology in ASD and ADHD: implication for further similarities or disorder-specific features?. Cereb Cortex. 2022;32:2332–42.https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab326.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMaier S, Philipsen A, Perlov E, Runge K, Matthies S, Ebert D, et al. Left insular cortical thinning differentiates the inattentive and combined subtype of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2023;159:196–204.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.01.030.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarArmstrong E, Schleicher A, Omran H, Curtis M, Zilles K. The ontogeny of human gyrification. Cereb Cortex. 1995;5:56–63.https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/5.1.56.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarWhite T, Su S, Schmidt M, Kao C-Y, Sapiro G. The development of gyrification in childhood and adolescence. Brain Cogn. 2010;72:36–45.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2009.10.009.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSasabayashi D, Takayanagi Y, Takahashi T, Furuichi A, Kobayashi H, Noguchi K, et al. Increased brain gyrification and subsequent relapse in patients with first-episode schizophrenia. Front Psychiatry. 2022;13:937605.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.937605.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBasavaraju R, France J, Sigmon HC, Girgis RR, Brucato G, Lieberman JA, et al. Increased parietal and occipital lobe gyrification predicts conversion to syndromal psychosis in a clinical high-risk cohort. Schizophr Res. 2023;255:246–55.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2023.03.027.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSasabayashi D, Takayanagi Y, Takahashi T, Koike S, Yamasue H, Katagiri N, et al. Increased occipital gyrification and development of psychotic disorders in individuals with an at-risk mental state: a multicenter study. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;82:737–45.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.05.018.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarLaatsch J, Stein F, Maier S, Matthies S, Sobanski E, Alm B, et al. Neural correlates of inattention in adults with ADHD. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2024.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-024-01872-2. e-pub ahead of print 29 July 2024.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarPhilipsen A, Graf E, Jans T, Matthies S, Borel P, Colla M, et al. A randomized controlled multicenter trial on the multimodal treatment of adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: enrollment and characteristics of the study sample. Atten Defic Hyperact Disord. 2014;6:35–47.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12402-013-0120-z.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarPhilipsen A, Jans T, Graf E, Matthies S, Borel P, Colla M, et al. Effects of group psychotherapy, individual counseling, methylphenidate, and placebo in the treatment of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015;72:1199–210.https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.2146.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarPhilipsen A, Graf E, van Tebartz Elst L, Jans T, Warnke A, Hesslinger B, et al. Evaluation of the efficacy and effectiveness of a structured disorder tailored psychotherapy in ADHD in adults: study protocol of a randomized controlled multicentre trial. Atten Defic Hyperact Disord. 2010;2:203–12.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12402-010-0046-7.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSmith SM, Nichols TE. Threshold-free cluster enhancement: addressing problems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster inference. Neuroimage. 2009;44:83–98.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.03.061.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarContarino VE, Bulgheroni S, Annunziata S, Erbetta A, Riva D. Widespread focal cortical alterations in autism spectrum disorder with intellectual disability detected by threshold-free cluster enhancement. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2016;37:1721–26.https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A4779.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarWorld Medical Association. Declaration of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects. JAMA. 2013;310:2191–94.https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.281053.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarConners CK, Erhardt D, Epstein JN, Parker JD, Sitarenios G, Sparrow E. Self-ratings of ADHD symptoms in adults I: Factor structure and normative data. J Atten Disord. 1999;3:141–51.https://doi.org/10.1177/108705479900300303.ArticleGoogle ScholarChristiansen H, Kis B, Hirsch O, Philipsen A, Henneck M, Panczuk A, et al. German validation of the Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scales-self-report (CAARS-S) I: factor structure and normative data. Eur Psychiatry. 2011;26:100–07.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2009.12.024.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarChristiansen H, Kis B, Hirsch O, Matthies S, Hebebrand J, Uekermann J, et al. German validation of the Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scales (CAARS) II: reliability, validity, diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. Eur Psychiatry. 2012;27:321–28.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2010.12.010.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarChristiansen H, Hirsch O, Philipsen A, Oades RD, Matthies S, Hebebrand J, et al. German validation of the conners adult ADHD rating scale-self-report: confirmation of factor structure in a large sample of participants with ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2013;17:690–98.https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054711435680.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarAshburner J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. Neuroimage. 2007;38:95–113.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.07.007.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarAshburner J, Friston KJ. Unified segmentation. Neuroimage. 2005;26:839–51.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.02.018.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarStein F, Meller T, Brosch K, Schmitt S, Ringwald K, Pfarr JK, et al. Psychopathological syndromes across affective and psychotic disorders correlate with gray matter volumes. Schizophr Bull. 2021;47:1740–50.https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbab037.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDahnke R, Yotter RA, Gaser C. Cortical thickness and central surface estimation. Neuroimage. 2013;65:336–48.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.050.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarDesikan RS, Ségonne F, Fischl B, Quinn BT, Dickerson BC, Blacker D, et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. 2006;31:968–80.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarParlatini V, Andrews DS, Pretzsch CM, Arenella M, Daly E, Ecker C et al. Cortical alterations associated with lower response to methylphenidate in adults with ADHD. Nat Mental Health 2024;https://doi.org/10.1038/s44220-024-00228-y.Shaw P, Lerch J, Greenstein D, Sharp W, Clasen L, Evans A, et al. Longitudinal mapping of cortical thickness and clinical outcome in children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63:540–49.https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.540.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarYang Z, Kelly C, Castellanos FX, Leon T, Milham MP, Adler LA. Neural correlates of symptom improvement following stimulant treatment in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2016;26:527–36.https://doi.org/10.1089/cap.2015.0243.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLinssen AMW, Vuurman EFPM, Sambeth A, Nave S, Spooren W, Vargas G, et al. Contingent negative variation as a dopaminergic biomarker: evidence from dose-related effects of methylphenidate. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011;218:533–42.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-011-2345-x.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarLinssen AMW, Sambeth A, Vuurman EFPM, Riedel WJ. Cognitive effects of methylphenidate in healthy volunteers: a review of single dose studies. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014;17:961–77.https://doi.org/10.1017/S1461145713001594.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarChung YS, Hyatt CJ, Stevens MC. Adolescent maturation of the relationship between cortical gyrification and cognitive ability. Neuroimage. 2017;158:319–31.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.082.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSanfelici R, Ruef A, Antonucci LA, Penzel N, Sotiras A, Dong MS, et al. Novel gyrification networks reveal links with psychiatric risk factors in early illness. Cereb Cortex. 2022;32:1625–36.https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab288.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarPalaniyappan L, Liddle PF. Aberrant cortical gyrification in schizophrenia: a surface-based morphometry study. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2012;37:399–406.https://doi.org/10.1503/jpn.110119.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarSchaer M, Cuadra MB, Tamarit L, Lazeyras F, Eliez S, Thiran J-P. A surface-based approach to quantify local cortical gyrification. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2008;27:161–70.https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2007.903576.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGautam P, Anstey KJ, Wen W, Sachdev PS, Cherbuin N. Cortical gyrification and its relationships with cortical volume, cortical thickness, and cognitive performance in healthy mid-life adults. Behav Brain Res. 2015;287:331–39.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2015.03.018.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGreen S, Blackmon K, Thesen T, DuBois J, Wang X, Halgren E, et al. Parieto-frontal gyrification and working memory in healthy adults. Brain Imaging Behav. 2018;12:303–08.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-017-9696-9.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGregory MD, Kippenhan JS, Dickinson D, Carrasco J, Mattay VS, Weinberger DR, et al. Regional variations in brain gyrification are associated with general cognitive ability in humans. Curr Biol. 2016;26:1301–05.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.021.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCole MW, Ito T, Braver TS. Lateral prefrontal cortex contributes to fluid intelligence through multinetwork connectivity. Brain Connect. 2015;5:497–504.https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2015.0357.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarJung RE, Haier RJ. The Parieto-Frontal Integration Theory (P-FIT) of intelligence: converging neuroimaging evidence. Behav Brain Sci. 2007;30:135–54.https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X07001185. discussion 154-87.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarYuan P, Raz N. Prefrontal cortex and executive functions in healthy adults: a meta-analysis of structural neuroimaging studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014;42:180–92.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.02.005.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSmith GC, Kohn SJ, Savage-Stevens SE, Finch JJ, Ingate R, Lim YO. The effects of interpersonal and personal agency on perceived control and psychological well-being in adulthood. Gerontologist. 2000;40:458–68.https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/40.4.458.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle Scholarvan Lieshout M, Luman M, Twisk JWR, van Ewijk H, Groenman AP, Thissen AJAM, et al. A 6-year follow-up of a large European cohort of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder-combined subtype: outcomes in late adolescence and young adulthood. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016;25:1007–17.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-016-0820-y.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarSjöwall D, Bohlin G, Rydell A-M, Thorell LB. Neuropsychological deficits in preschool as predictors of ADHD symptoms and academic achievement in late adolescence. Child Neuropsychol. 2017;23:111–28.https://doi.org/10.1080/09297049.2015.1063595.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSkokauskas N, Hitoshi K, Shuji H, Frodl T. Neuroimaging markers for the prediction of treatment response to Methylphenidate in ADHD. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2013;17:543–51.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.04.007.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarNoble S, Scheinost D, Constable RT. Cluster failure or power failure? Evaluating sensitivity in cluster-level inference. Neuroimage. 2020;209:116468.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116468.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAcknowledgementsWe express our profound gratitude to the dedicated teams at each study site for their considerable investment of time and effort in this project. Furthermore, we extend our deepest appreciation to all study participants, whose essential contributions were instrumental in realising this work. The authors used ChatGPT 4.0 to improve grammatical accuracy and wording during the preparation of this manuscript. The authors carefully reviewed and revised all content and take full responsibility for the final published work.FundingCOMPAS is listed in the Current Controlled Trials registry (ISRCTN54096201) and was conducted as part of a multicentre research initiative on psychotherapy for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). This initiative was supported by funding from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF; 01GV0605, 01GV0606, ADHD-NET). The funding agencies played no role in the study’s design, data analysis, manuscript development, or publication decision. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Axel Krug, Alexandra Philipsen.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Psychiatry und Psychotherapy, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, GermanyJonathan Laatsch, Axel Krug & Alexandra PhilipsenDepartment of Psychiatry und Psychotherapy, University of Marburg, Marburg, GermanyFrederike SteinDepartment of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Center – University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, GermanySimon Maier, Swantje Matthies & Ludger Tebartz van ElstDepartment of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Lucerne, Lucerne, SwitzerlandEsther SobanskiDepartment of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty of Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, GermanyEsther Sobanski & Barbara AlmAuthorsJonathan LaatschView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarFrederike SteinView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarSimon MaierView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarSwantje MatthiesView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarEsther SobanskiView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarBarbara AlmView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarLudger Tebartz van ElstView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarAxel KrugView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarAlexandra PhilipsenView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsJ.L.: Conceptualisation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, review and editing, Visualisation; F.S.: Formal analysis, Software, Supervision, Writing – review and editing; S.M.: Conceptualisation, Project administration, MR measurements, Supervision, Writing – review and editing; S.M.: Conceptualisation, Project administration, MR measurements, Supervision, Writing – review and editing; E.S.: Investigation, Supervision; B.A.: Conceptualisation; L.T.v.E.: Conceptualisation, Project Administration, MR measurements, Investigation, Supervision, Resources; A.K.: Conceptualisation, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – Review and Editing, Supervision; A.P.: Conceptualisation, Supervision, Writing – Review & Editing, Project Administration, Investigation, Resources, Supervision.Corresponding authorCorrespondence toJonathan Laatsch.Ethics declarationsCompeting interestsJ.L., A.K., F.S., S.M., Sw.M. declare no competing financial interests. A.P. declares that she served on advisory boards, gave lectures, performed phase-3 studies, and received travel grants within the last five years from MEDICE Arzneimittel, Pütter GmbH and Co KG, Takeda, Boehringer, Janssen-Cilag, and receives royalties from books published by Elsevier, Hogrefe, MWV, Kohlhammer, Karger, Oxford Press, Thieme, Springer, Schattauer. She is a member of the German ADHD Guideline Group and author of the Updated European Consensus Statement. E.S. declares that she received a travel grant from Takeda and a grant from BMBF. B.A. declares that she has held lectures for Takeda. L.T.v.E. reported serving on advisory boards, delivering lectures, and receiving travel grants within the last 3 years from Eli Lilly and Co, Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Shire, UCB, GlaxoSmithKline, Servier Laboratories, Janssen, and Cyberonic.Additional informationPublisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplemental MaterialRights and permissionsOpen AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleLaatsch, J., Stein, F., Maier, S.et al.Cortical gyrification predicts initial treatment response in adults with ADHD.Transl Psychiatry15, 406 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-025-03681-0Download citationReceived:07 January 2025Revised:09 September 2025Accepted:02 October 2025Published:17 October 2025DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-025-03681-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy shareable link to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Cortical alterations associated with lower response to methylphenidate in adults with ADHDArticleOpen access01 April 2024 Prognostic associations of cortical gyrification in minimally medicated schizophrenia in an early intervention settingArticleOpen access29 October 2022 Beyond out-of-sample: robust and generalizable multivariate neuroanatomical patterns of psychiatric problems in youthArticle30 November 2024

---
*This content was automatically scraped by Webscraping Agent A*
