# 'Early childhood autism, Asperger type', by H. Asperger (1982).

**Authors:** ['KevinRebecchi']  
**Journal:** History of psychiatry  
**Date:** 2024-04-29  
**DOI:** 10.1177/0957154X241248261  
**Category:** asd  
**Source:** pubmed  
**Scraped by:** agent_b  
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:34:04.812907  

## Abstract

After his 1944 thesis, Asperger continued to write about autism, but none of these texts have been translated. At a time when autism spectrum disorder faces many challenges (e.g. the nature and measurement of autism), this text tells us more about the particular population that Asperger worked with. He describes sensitive, intelligent, creative and rational children, a far cry from the Wing triad. Moreover, 'Asperger's Syndrome' was introduced after he had died, was included in the DSM-IV in 1994 and was omitted from the DSM-5 in 2013. The question posed by this last text, written before his death, is whether Asperger's descriptions of autistic children are really part of the autism spectrum disorder or whether they are outside the pathological field.

## Full Text

'Early childhood autism, Asperger type', by H. Asperger (1982) - PubMed This site needs JavaScript to work properly. Please enable it to take advantage of the complete set of features! Clipboard, Search History, and several other advanced features are temporarily unavailable. Skip to main page content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation Search: Search Advanced Create alert Create RSS Clipboard User Guide Found 1 result for 10.1177/0957154X241248261 Save Email Send to Clipboard My BibliographyCollectionsCitation manager Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Save citation to file Format: Summary (text) PubMed PMID Abstract (text) CSV Create file Cancel Email citation Email address has not been verified. Go to My NCBI account settings to confirm your email and then refresh this page. To: Subject: Body: Format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) MeSH and other data Send email Cancel Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Add to My Bibliography My Bibliography Unable to load your delegates due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Your saved search Name of saved search: Search terms: 10.1177/0957154X241248261 Test search terms Would you like email updates of new search results? Saved Search Alert Radio Buttons Yes No Email: (change) Frequency: Monthly Weekly Daily Which day? The first Sunday The first Monday The first Tuesday The first Wednesday The first Thursday The first Friday The first Saturday The first day The first weekday Which day? Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Report format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) PubMed Send at most: 1 item 5 items 10 items 20 items 50 items 100 items 200 items Send even when there aren't any new results Optional text in email: Save Cancel Create a file for external citation management software Create file Cancel Your RSS Feed Name of RSS Feed: Number of items displayed: 5 10 15 20 50 100 Create RSS Cancel RSS Link Copy Full text links Atypon ORBi (University of Liege) Full text links ActionsCiteCollectionsAdd to CollectionsCreate a new collectionAdd to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an errorPlease try again Add Cancel PermalinkPermalinkCopyDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Page navigation Title & authors Abstract Conflict of interest statement Publication types MeSH terms LinkOut - more resources Title & authors Abstract Conflict of interest statement Publication types MeSH terms LinkOut - more resources Filters applied. Clear filters Hist Psychiatry Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Sep;35(3-4):363-376. doi: 10.1177/0957154X241248261. Epub 2024 Apr 28. 'Early childhood autism, Asperger type', by H. Asperger (1982) Kevin Rebecchi 1 Affiliations Expand Affiliation 1 Université Lumière Lyon 2, France. PMID: 38679954 DOI: 10.1177/0957154X241248261 Free article Item in Clipboard 'Early childhood autism, Asperger type', by H. Asperger (1982) Kevin Rebecchi. Hist Psychiatry. 2024 Sep. Free article Show details Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Hist Psychiatry Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Sep;35(3-4):363-376. doi: 10.1177/0957154X241248261. Epub 2024 Apr 28. Author Kevin Rebecchi 1 Affiliation 1 Université Lumière Lyon 2, France. PMID: 38679954 DOI: 10.1177/0957154X241248261 Item in Clipboard Full text links CiteDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Abstract After his 1944 thesis, Asperger continued to write about autism, but none of these texts have been translated. At a time when autism spectrum disorder faces many challenges (e.g. the nature and measurement of autism), this text tells us more about the particular population that Asperger worked with. He describes sensitive, intelligent, creative and rational children, a far cry from the Wing triad. Moreover, 'Asperger's Syndrome' was introduced after he had died, was included in the DSM-IV in 1994 and was omitted from the DSM-5 in 2013. The question posed by this last text, written before his death, is whether Asperger's descriptions of autistic children are really part of the autism spectrum disorder or whether they are outside the pathological field. Keywords: Asperger; autism spectrum disorder; children; neurodiversity; syndrome. PubMed Disclaimer Conflict of interest statement Declaration of conflicting interestsThe author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Publication types Historical Article Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search MeSH terms Asperger Syndrome* / history Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Autism Spectrum Disorder / history Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Child Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Child, Preschool Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search History, 20th Century Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Humans Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Atypon ORBi (University of Liege) Full text links [x] Atypon ORBi (University of Liege) [x] Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Send To Clipboard Email Save My Bibliography Collections Citation Manager [x] NCBI Literature Resources MeSH PMC Bookshelf Disclaimer The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited. Follow NCBI Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Connect with NLM Twitter SM-Facebook SM-Youtube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov
