# Experiences of families with children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder in World Health Organization Afro-Regions: A scoping review.

**Authors:** ['OliviaBaloyi', 'Mary AnnJarvis', 'GeldineChironda', 'PrettyMbeje', 'Silingene JoyceNgcobo', 'ThusileGqaleni', 'Euphemia MbaliMhlongo', 'Winnie BaphumeleleNgcobo', 'PetraBrysiewicz']  
**Journal:** Nursing & health sciences  
**Date:** 2024-05-02  
**DOI:** 10.1111/nhs.13123  
**Category:** asd  
**Source:** pubmed  
**Scraped by:** agent_b  
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:33:59.836804  

## Abstract

A scoping review on Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and its impact on the families of affected children was undertaken due to insufficient information available on the diverse experiences impacting their lives. Using the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology, eligibility criteria were guided by Population (families), Concept (family experiences), and Context (African region). English-language articles were sought from a variety of databases and search engines. The publication date of the identified articles ranged from 2003 to 2021 with most published in 2020 (n = 10), and the majority using qualitative methodologies (n = 51). Most family members involved were parents (n = 51) and their ages ranged from 18 to 75 years. The families experienced various challenges related to their child with regard to education, healthcare, and the broader community including lack of support. Family coping strategies included believing in God, attending counseling sessions, adapting, and accepting the situation. Healthcare professionals should be prepared and positioned to educate families and siblings on various aspects of ASD. There is a need for active, continued research on families within most countries of World Health Organization Afro-region.

## Full Text

Experiences of families with children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder in World Health Organization Afro-Regions: A scoping review - PubMed This site needs JavaScript to work properly. Please enable it to take advantage of the complete set of features! Clipboard, Search History, and several other advanced features are temporarily unavailable. Skip to main page content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation Search: Search Advanced Create alert Create RSS Clipboard User Guide Found 1 result for 10.1111/nhs.13123 Save Email Send to Clipboard My BibliographyCollectionsCitation manager Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Save citation to file Format: Summary (text) PubMed PMID Abstract (text) CSV Create file Cancel Email citation Email address has not been verified. Go to My NCBI account settings to confirm your email and then refresh this page. To: Subject: Body: Format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) MeSH and other data Send email Cancel Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Add to My Bibliography My Bibliography Unable to load your delegates due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Your saved search Name of saved search: Search terms: 10.1111/nhs.13123 Test search terms Would you like email updates of new search results? Saved Search Alert Radio Buttons Yes No Email: (change) Frequency: Monthly Weekly Daily Which day? The first Sunday The first Monday The first Tuesday The first Wednesday The first Thursday The first Friday The first Saturday The first day The first weekday Which day? Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Report format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) PubMed Send at most: 1 item 5 items 10 items 20 items 50 items 100 items 200 items Send even when there aren't any new results Optional text in email: Save Cancel Create a file for external citation management software Create file Cancel Your RSS Feed Name of RSS Feed: Number of items displayed: 5 10 15 20 50 100 Create RSS Cancel RSS Link Copy Full text links Wiley Full text links ActionsCiteCollectionsAdd to CollectionsCreate a new collectionAdd to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an errorPlease try again Add Cancel PermalinkPermalinkCopyDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Page navigation Title & authors Abstract References Publication types MeSH terms LinkOut - more resources Title & authors Abstract References Publication types MeSH terms LinkOut - more resources Filters applied. Clear filters Nurs Health Sci Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Jun;26(2):e13123. doi: 10.1111/nhs.13123. Experiences of families with children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder in World Health Organization Afro-Regions: A scoping review Olivia Baloyi 1 , Mary Ann Jarvis 1 , Geldine Chironda 1 , Pretty Mbeje 1 , Silingene Joyce Ngcobo 1 , Thusile Gqaleni 1 , Euphemia Mbali Mhlongo 1 , Winnie Baphumelele Ngcobo 1 , Petra Brysiewicz 1 Affiliations Expand Affiliation 1 Department of Nursing, College of Health Sciences, School of Nursing and Public Health, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa. PMID: 38692580 DOI: 10.1111/nhs.13123 Item in Clipboard Experiences of families with children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder in World Health Organization Afro-Regions: A scoping review Olivia Baloyi et al. Nurs Health Sci. 2024 Jun. Show details Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Nurs Health Sci Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Jun;26(2):e13123. doi: 10.1111/nhs.13123. Authors Olivia Baloyi 1 , Mary Ann Jarvis 1 , Geldine Chironda 1 , Pretty Mbeje 1 , Silingene Joyce Ngcobo 1 , Thusile Gqaleni 1 , Euphemia Mbali Mhlongo 1 , Winnie Baphumelele Ngcobo 1 , Petra Brysiewicz 1 Affiliation 1 Department of Nursing, College of Health Sciences, School of Nursing and Public Health, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa. PMID: 38692580 DOI: 10.1111/nhs.13123 Item in Clipboard Full text links CiteDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Abstract A scoping review on Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and its impact on the families of affected children was undertaken due to insufficient information available on the diverse experiences impacting their lives. Using the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology, eligibility criteria were guided by Population (families), Concept (family experiences), and Context (African region). English-language articles were sought from a variety of databases and search engines. The publication date of the identified articles ranged from 2003 to 2021 with most published in 2020 (n = 10), and the majority using qualitative methodologies (n = 51). Most family members involved were parents (n = 51) and their ages ranged from 18 to 75 years. The families experienced various challenges related to their child with regard to education, healthcare, and the broader community including lack of support. Family coping strategies included believing in God, attending counseling sessions, adapting, and accepting the situation. Healthcare professionals should be prepared and positioned to educate families and siblings on various aspects of ASD. There is a need for active, continued research on families within most countries of World Health Organization Afro-region. Keywords: Asperger syndrome; Autism Spectrum Disorder; Sub‐Saharan Africa; World Health Organization Afro‐region; children; experiences; families. © 2024 The Authors. Nursing & Health Sciences published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. PubMed Disclaimer References REFERENCES Abebe, B. (2020). The lived experiences of mothers raising children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder in Ethiopia: Perceptions and challenges [Unpublished master's thesis]. University of Stavanger. https://hdl.handle.net/11250/2677675 Abubakar, A., Ssewanyana, D., de Vries, P. J., & Newton, C. R. (2016). Autism Spectrum Disorders in sub‐Saharan Africa. The Lancet Psychiatry, 3(9), 800–802. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30138-9 Adams, S. N., Dadabhay, A., & Neille, J. (2021). An exploration into mothers’ experiences of feeding children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in South Africa. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 73(3), 164–173. https://doi.org/10.1159/000507928 Adams, S. N., Verachia, R., & Coutts, K. (2020). ‘A blender without the lid on’: Mealtime experiences of caregivers with a child with Autism Spectrum Disorder in South Africa. South African Journal of Communication Disorders, 67(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajcd.v67i1.708 Allen‐Leigh, B., Lazcano‐Ponce, E., Bakare, M. O., Azeem, M. W., & Katz, G. G. (2022). Cultural issues. In M. O. Bertelli, S. Deb, K. Munir, A. Hassiotis, L. Salvador‐Carulla (Eds.),Textbook of psychiatry for intellectual disability and Autism Spectrum Disorder (pp. 969–984). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95720-3_39 Show all 155 references Publication types Scoping Review Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search MeSH terms Adaptation, Psychological Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Adolescent Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Adult Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Autism Spectrum Disorder* / psychology Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Child Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Family* / psychology Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Female Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Humans Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search Male Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search World Health Organization* / organization & administration Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Ovid Technologies, Inc. Wiley Medical MedlinePlus Consumer Health Information MedlinePlus Health Information Full text links [x] Wiley [x] Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Send To Clipboard Email Save My Bibliography Collections Citation Manager [x] NCBI Literature Resources MeSH PMC Bookshelf Disclaimer The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited. Follow NCBI Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Connect with NLM Twitter SM-Facebook SM-Youtube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov
