# Concurrent and Discriminant Validity of the Farsi Translation of the Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition (SRS-2) and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ).

**Authors:** ['NajmehTavakolian', 'ZahraShahrivar', 'JavadMahmoudi-Gharaei', 'SaraHojatitabar', 'FatemehMehrzad', 'MehdiTehrani-Doost']  
**Journal:** Iranian journal of psychiatry  
**Date:** 2024-04-30  
**DOI:** 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108  
**Category:** asd  
**Source:** pubmed  
**Scraped by:** agent_b  
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:34:02.368372  

## Abstract



## Full Text

Concurrent and Discriminant Validity of the Farsi Translation of the Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition (SRS-2) and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) - PubMed This site needs JavaScript to work properly. Please enable it to take advantage of the complete set of features! Clipboard, Search History, and several other advanced features are temporarily unavailable. Skip to main page content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation Search: Search Advanced Create alert Create RSS Clipboard User Guide Found 1 result for 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108 Save Email Send to Clipboard My BibliographyCollectionsCitation manager Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Save citation to file Format: Summary (text) PubMed PMID Abstract (text) CSV Create file Cancel Email citation Email address has not been verified. Go to My NCBI account settings to confirm your email and then refresh this page. To: Subject: Body: Format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) MeSH and other data Send email Cancel Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Add to My Bibliography My Bibliography Unable to load your delegates due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Your saved search Name of saved search: Search terms: 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108 Test search terms Would you like email updates of new search results? Saved Search Alert Radio Buttons Yes No Email: (change) Frequency: Monthly Weekly Daily Which day? The first Sunday The first Monday The first Tuesday The first Wednesday The first Thursday The first Friday The first Saturday The first day The first weekday Which day? Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Report format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) PubMed Send at most: 1 item 5 items 10 items 20 items 50 items 100 items 200 items Send even when there aren't any new results Optional text in email: Save Cancel Create a file for external citation management software Create file Cancel Your RSS Feed Name of RSS Feed: Number of items displayed: 5 10 15 20 50 100 Create RSS Cancel RSS Link Copy Full text links Free PMC article Full text links ActionsCiteCollectionsAdd to CollectionsCreate a new collectionAdd to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an errorPlease try again Add Cancel PermalinkPermalinkCopyDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Page navigation Title & authors Abstract Conflict of interest statement Figures References LinkOut - more resources Title & authors Abstract Conflict of interest statement Figures References LinkOut - more resources Filters applied. Clear filters Iran J Psychiatry Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Feb;19(2):221-228. doi: 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108. Concurrent and Discriminant Validity of the Farsi Translation of the Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition (SRS-2) and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) Najmeh Tavakolian 1 2 , Zahra Shahrivar 1 2 , Javad Mahmoudi-Gharaei 2 , Sara Hojatitabar 3 , Fatemeh Mehrzad 4 , Mehdi Tehrani-Doost 1 2 Affiliations Expand Affiliations 1 Research Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Roozbeh Psychiatry Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 2 Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 3 Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. 4 Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. PMID: 38686312 PMCID: PMC11055970 DOI: 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108 Item in Clipboard Concurrent and Discriminant Validity of the Farsi Translation of the Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition (SRS-2) and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) Najmeh Tavakolian et al. Iran J Psychiatry. 2024 Feb. Show details Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Iran J Psychiatry Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Feb;19(2):221-228. doi: 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108. Authors Najmeh Tavakolian 1 2 , Zahra Shahrivar 1 2 , Javad Mahmoudi-Gharaei 2 , Sara Hojatitabar 3 , Fatemeh Mehrzad 4 , Mehdi Tehrani-Doost 1 2 Affiliations 1 Research Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Roozbeh Psychiatry Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 2 Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 3 Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. 4 Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran. PMID: 38686312 PMCID: PMC11055970 DOI: 10.18502/ijps.v19i2.15108 Item in Clipboard Full text links CiteDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Abstract Objective: Early detection of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) can lead to earlier intervention and greater improvement of children's quality of life and performance; hence, the use of screening tools is essential to facilitate the diagnosis process. The aim of the present study was to determine the clinical and differential validity of Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition (SRS-2) and Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) in a group of children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder compared to a normal developmental group. Method : The study was conducted in Roozbeh Hospital involving 52 children with ASD and 53 typically developing (TD) children, aged between 4-12 years. Their parents completed the SRS-2 and SCQ. These children were also interviewed using the Childhood Autism Rating Scale, 2nd Edition (CARS-2) and Asperger Syndrome Diagnostic Scale (ASDS). After completion, the results were analyzed using the SPSS Version 18 software and a significant level of 0.05. Results: The average age of children in the autism group was 7.5 ± 2.7 years, while in the typically developing (TD) children group, it was 7.7 ± 2.3 years (P = 0.656). A positive correlation coefficient was observed between the CARS questionnaire score, the SRS questionnaire score, the SCQ questionnaire score, and the ASDS ‏(P < 0.01). In the SRS questionnaire, the area under the ROC curve was 0.976, and in the SCQ questionnaire it was 0.953, both of which had a good and significant diagnostic value (P < 0.001). A sensitivity of 0.942 and specificity of 0.811 for the cut-off point of 62.5 were obtained in the SRS questionnaire. Additionally, a sensitivity of 0.865 and specificity of 0.925 for the cut-off point of 15.5 were achieved in the SCQ questionnaire. Conclusion: The SRS-2 and the SCQ are sensitive and specific tools for identifying and discriminating children with autism spectrum disorder. Keywords: Autism Spectrum Disorder; Communication; Social Interaction Validity. Copyright © 2024 Tehran University of Medical Sciences. Published by Tehran University of Medical Sciences. PubMed Disclaimer Conflict of interest statement None. Figures Figure 1 Comparison of the Areas Under… Figure 1 Comparison of the Areas Under the Curve - for Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition,… Figure 1 Comparison of the Areas Under the Curve - for Social Responsiveness Scale-Second Edition, Social Communication Questionnaire See this image and copyright information in PMC References Kanner L. Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Acta Paedopsychiatr. 1968;35(4):100–36. - PubMed Svenaeus F. Diagnosing mental disorders and saving the normal: American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing; 991 pp. ISBN: 978-0890425558. Price: $122.70. Med Health Care Philos. 2014;17:241-4. Fombonne E. The epidemiology of autism: a review. Psychol Med. 1999;29(4):769–86. - PubMed Zeidan J, Fombonne E, Scorah J, Ibrahim A, Durkin MS, Saxena S, et al. Global prevalence of autism: A systematic review update. Autism Res. 2022;15(5):778–90. - PMC - PubMed Dossetor DR. Responding to diagnostic uncertainties of autistic spectrum disorders: facing the challenges. J Paediatr Child Health. 2005;41(8):405–6. - PubMed Show all 33 references LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Europe PubMed Central PubMed Central Full text links [x] Free PMC article [x] Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Send To Clipboard Email Save My Bibliography Collections Citation Manager [x] NCBI Literature Resources MeSH PMC Bookshelf Disclaimer The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited. Follow NCBI Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Connect with NLM Twitter SM-Facebook SM-Youtube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov
