# Mesomelia-synostoses syndrome: contiguous deletion syndrome, SULF1 haploinsufficiency or enhancer adoption?

**DOI:** 10.1186/s13039-024-00684-2
**Journal:** Molecular cytogenetics
**Date:** 2024-07-12
**Authors:** ['IngridBendas Feres Lima', 'Lúcia deFátima Marques de Moraes', 'CarlosRoberto da Fonseca', 'JuanClinton Llerena Junior', 'ManaMehrjouy', 'NielsTommerup', 'EleniceFerreira Bastos']
**Category:** asd
**Source:** pubmed
**Scraped by:** agent_a
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T11:08:03.706071
**Source URL:** https://doi.org/10.1186/s13039-024-00684-2

## Abstract

Mesomelia-Synostoses Syndrome (MSS)(OMIM 600,383) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by mesomelic limb shortening, acral synostoses and multiple congenital malformations which is described as a contiguous deletion syndrome involving the two genes SULF1 and SLCO5A1. The study of apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangements (BCRs) is a cytogenetic strategy used to identify candidate genes associated with Mendelian diseases or abnormal phenotypes. With the improved development of genomic technologies, new methods refine this search, allowing better delineation of breakpoints as well as more accurate genotype-phenotype correlation.
We present a boy with a global development deficit, delayed speech development and an ASD (Asperger) family history, with an apparently balanced "de novo" reciprocal translocation [t(1;8)(p32.2;q13)dn]. The cytogenetic molecular study identified a likely pathogenic deletion of 21 kb in the 15q12 region, while mate pair sequencing identified gene-truncations at both the 1p32.2 and 8q13 translocation breakpoints.
The identification of a pathogenic alteration on 15q12 involving GABRA5 was likely the main cause of the ASD-phenotype. Importantly, the chr8 translocation breakpoint truncating SLCO5A1 exclude SLCO5A1 as a candidate for MSS, leaving SULF1 as the primary candidate. However, the deletions observed in MSS remove a topological associated domain (TAD) boundary separating SULF1 and SLCO5A1. Hence, Mesomelia-Synostoses syndrome is either caused by haploinsufficiency of SULF1 or ectopic enhancer effects where skeletal/chrondrogenic SULF1 enhancers drive excopic expression of developmental genes in adjacent TADs including PRDM14, NCOA2 and/or EYA1.

## Full Text Content

Case ReportOpen accessPublished:12 July 2024Mesomelia-synostoses syndrome: contiguous deletion syndrome,SULF1haploinsufficiency or enhancer adoption?Ingrid Bendas Feres Lima1,Lúcia de Fátima Marques de Moraes1,Carlos Roberto da Fonseca1,Juan Clinton Llerena Junior1,2,Mana Mehrjouy3,Niels Tommerup3&…Elenice Ferreira Bastos1Show authorsMolecular Cytogeneticsvolume17, Article number:15(2024)Cite this article1232AccessesMetricsdetailsAbstractBackgroundMesomelia-Synostoses Syndrome (MSS)(OMIM 600,383) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by mesomelic limb shortening, acral synostoses and multiple congenital malformations which is described as a contiguous deletion syndrome involving the two genesSULF1andSLCO5A1. The study of apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangements (BCRs) is a cytogenetic strategy used to identify candidate genes associated with Mendelian diseases or abnormal phenotypes. With the improved development of genomic technologies, new methods refine this search, allowing better delineation of breakpoints as well as more accurate genotype-phenotype correlation.Case presentationWe present a boy with a global development deficit, delayed speech development and an ASD (Asperger) family history, with an apparently balanced “de novo” reciprocal translocation [t(1;8)(p32.2;q13)dn]. The cytogenetic molecular study identified a likely pathogenic deletion of 21 kb in the 15q12 region, while mate pair sequencing identified gene-truncations at both the 1p32.2 and 8q13 translocation breakpoints.ConclusionsThe identification of a pathogenic alteration on 15q12 involvingGABRA5was likely the main cause of the ASD-phenotype. Importantly, the chr8 translocation breakpoint truncatingSLCO5A1excludeSLCO5A1as a candidate for MSS, leavingSULF1as the primary candidate. However, the deletions observed in MSS remove a topological associated domain (TAD) boundary separatingSULF1andSLCO5A1.Hence, Mesomelia-Synostoses syndrome is either caused by haploinsufficiency ofSULF1or ectopic enhancer effects where skeletal/chrondrogenicSULF1enhancers drive excopic expression of developmental genes in adjacent TADs includingPRDM14, NCOA2and/orEYA1.BackgroundThe characterization of chromosomal rearrangements, especially balanced translocations associated with an abnormal phenotype, is a classical strategy for delineation of candidate regions/genes associated with Mendelian diseases [1,2,3]. Examples are Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, Neurofibromatosis type 1, BPES syndrome, and many others [4,5,6]. With technological advances in molecular methods, such as Microarray Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) and Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) paired-end sequencing techniques, genotype-phenotype relationship can be even more precisely revealed [3,7].Mesomelia-Synostoses syndrome (MSS) or Verlores-David-Pfeiffer syndrome (VDPS) is a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by mesomelic limb shortening combined with multiple congenital malformations and typical acral synostoses [8,9]. With one apparent exception, affected individuals have a deletion in the 8q13 region comprising two closely located genes,SULF1andSLCO5A1[10,11]. Hence, MSS is characterized as a contiguous deletion syndrome in OMIM (#600,383).Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex neurological disorder with strong genetic influence. Hundreds of genes associated with a high risk for ASD have been identified [12], but the etiology of the disease is still unknown in most cases.We present a boy with ASD and dysmorphisms, with an apparently balanced “de novo” translocation t(1;8)(p32.2;q31.3)dn. Mate-pair sequencing identified a disruption ofSLCO5A1. The patient does not have any MSS features, supporting that loss-of-function ofSLCO5A1is not a determining factor in MSS.Case presentationThe 4 years old boy was referred for genetic evaluation due to developmental delay, language delay and a family history of autism (Asperger syndrome). The parents were non-consanguineous. An older brother and a maternal cousin have Asperger’s, the latter with language deficit with normal auditory processing. There was an adequate and normal motor development. There was a deficit in verbal and non-verbal communication, with syllable speaking at age 3 and an inability to form sentences. He does not understand verbal orders and lacks autonomy. Otherwise he had normal anthropometric and growth data within the family’s growth curve.The patient was re-evaluated at the age of 16, presenting with social phobia, no socialization and hyperacusis. On physical examination, he presented left side polythelia, long-limbed and no dysmorphic features. (Fig.1)Fig. 1(A)Longilineal patient, torso and limbs longer than average(B)Polytheia, supernumerary nipple on the left sideFull size imageMethodsThis study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Fernandes Figueira Institute (Fiocruz – CAEE 35766720.7.0000.5269), with written informed consent from the patient’s legal guardians.Cell culture, G-band karyotype analysisThe proband’s cytogenetic study was performed from peripheral blood stimulated with phytohemaglutinin. The cytogenetic analysis was carried out after GTG banding (450 band level) and the result was classified according to ISCN 2020 [13].Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis (FISH)The FISH technique was performed according to standard protocols, using cMYC (MYC) Breakapart (8q24.21 region), 1p36 (1p36.32 and 1qter region) and WCP8-specific gene (whole chromosome) probes (Cytocell, Inc.).Array CGHArray CGH was performed using CytoScan®750 Affymetrix according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The analysis was performed using the Chromosome Analysis Suite program (Affymetrix®). The reference sequence used was Human Genome Build hg19 (UCSC Genome Browser February 2009).Mate-pair sequencingMate-pair sequencing was performed by the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen using Illumina’s Nextera DNA library and Mate-pair sample preparation kit following the instructions. The final libraries were quantified using Pico Green (Quant-iT, Invitrogen) and Agilent Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 kit (Quant-iT, Invitrogen). Samples were sequenced on a HiSeq®2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) (2 × 100 bp) and alternatively sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform (2 × 75 or 2 × 150 bp). The mate-pairs passing Illumina Chastity filtering (> 0.6) were aligned to the hg19 human reference genome using Burrows-Wheeler-Aligner (BWA). Reads with unexpected strand orientation or reads aligning to different chromosomes were extracted and SVDetect and Delly software were used to detect potential rearrangements.Constraint scores in gnomADLoss-of function scores (pLI-scores) ofSULF1,SLCO5A1, PRDM14, NCOA2andEYA1were obtained from gnomAD (https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/).Topological Associated Domains (TADs) and chromatin loopsWe obtained published coordinates for Topological Associated Domains (TADs) [14] and chromatin loops [15,16].ResultsCytogenetic analysisCytogenetic analysis identified a male karyotype with an apparently balanced translocation involving chromosome 1 and chromosome 8 [46, XY t(1;8)(p32.2;q13)]dn (Fig.2).Fig. 2(A)Karyogram with 46,XY, t(1;8)(p32.2;q13)dn(B)Partial karyogram showing the balanced translocation with arrows at the breakpointsFull size imageFluorescence in situ hybridization-FISHFISH delimited the breakpoints at t(1;8)(p36.3;q21) (Figs.3and4).Fig. 3A, B)Result of FISH analysis using the probes MYC (red and green staining) and 1p36 pobre (1qter green staining), demonstrating the presence of the region 8q24.21 (MYC) on the der [1] chromosomeFull size imageFig. 4A, B)Result of FISH analysis using WCP8 probes - painting of 8 (green) and 1p36 (1p36.33 red). We can observe three green signals, one on the intact chromosome 8, and signals on both the der [8] and der [1] chromosomes. There are two red signals, one on the telomeric region of the innermost normal chromosome 1 and another on the der [8], which demonstrates the translocation between chromosomes 1 and 8Full size imageaCGHMicroarray analysis revealed a 21 kb deletion in 15q12 (46,XY.arr[GRCh19] 15q12 (27151153_27173084)x1) partially involving the coding region of theGABRA5gene. This is considered to be a pathogenic variant. No losses or gains were identified in the regions involved in the chromosomal rearrangement.Mate-pair sequencingMate-pair sequencing identified a breakpoint on chromosome 1 (chr1:56964825_56965128 (hg19)) within the first exon ofPLPP3(phospholipid phosphatase 3 (Fig.5A). The breakpoint on chromosome 8 (chr8:70669917_70670110) disruptedSLCO5A1(Fig.5B). There were no additional breakpoints in the genome, nor reduced coverage of paired-end reads in the breakpoint regions, compatible with the normal array-CGH-results. Hence, the t(1;8) is a simple two-way balanced reciprocal translocation.Fig. 5Diagram demonstrating the breakpoint regions based on the results from the mate-pair analysis 1(A)chromosome 1 with the breakpoint withinPPAP2Band(B)chromosome 8 where the break occurred in theSLCO5A1geneFull size imageFig. 6Genome Browser view of a 4 Mb region in 8q13, showing the reported deletions in MSS (bars and blue segment) and the t(1;8) breakpoint truncatingSLCO5A1(arrow), in the context of HiC chromatin loops [15] and HiC-heatmaps defining TADs [14]. *Denotes loops defined by micro-C [16]. The MSS deletions remove a TAD boundary betweenSULF1andSLCO5A1, resulting in neo-TADs that may bring skeletal enhancers in the non-deleted part of theSULF1TAD in proximity to genes in the adjacent TAD (PRDM14,NCOA2) and even into the next TAD (EYA1)(curved lines)Full size imageDiscussionWe describe a boy where cytogenomic and mate-pair mapping revealed two structural chromosomal alterations: aCGH identified a segmental loss at 15q12 of 21.9 kb considered to be pathogenic.The segmental loss at 15q12 of 21.9 kb affects theGABRA5gene region, which has been associated with ASD [17].GABRA5is a member of the Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) receptor gene family, which are proteins involved in GABAergic neurotransmission in the mammalian central nervous system. GABA-A receptors are the site of actuation for several important pharmacological agents, including barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and ethanol [18].Polymorphic Tandem Repeat (PTR) at theGABRA5locus have been described, including both deletions and duplications in the 15q11-q13 region, known to be methylated in Prader Willi and Angelman syndromes (MIM, 176,270; MIM, 105,830) [19,20]. In turn, Butler et al. [21] identified a heterozygous de novo missense variant in theGABRA5gene (V294L; 137142.0001) in a 2-year-old boy with epileptic encephalopathy and developmental disorder.As well, Hernandez et al. [22] identified heterozygous de novo mutations in theGABRA5gene (V294F, 137142.0002 and S413F, 137142.0003). The variation detected in our patient was considered pathogenic and compatibel with the ASD phenotype.The gnomAD database contain variants originating from > 730,000 whole exome and > 75,000 whole genome sequenced unrelated individuals [23]. One specific feature of gnomAD is that the cumulative variant data reveal if a specific gene can tolerate loss-of-function variants. Thus, > 3,000 of the human genes are loss-of-function constrained (have a pLI-score > 0,9).GABRA5has an intermediate pLI of 0.79.GABRA5is specifically and higly expressed in the brain.Mate-pair sequencing resolved the translocation breakpoints with a resolution of 303 bp withinPLPP3on chromosome 1 and 193 bp withinSLCO5A1on chromosome 8.PLPP3encodes a member of the phosphatidic acid phosphatase (PAP) family. It is a membrane glycoprotein and a loss-of-function constrained gene with a pLI = 1. It is not related to a known clinical phenotype. It is not a brain-specific gene but is expressed in most tissues.SLCO5A1(Solute Carrier Organic Anion Transporter Family Member 5A1) encodes a protein involved in cellular transport activity. Its expression is detected in numerous tissues, such as the brain, heart, skeletal muscle, ovary, and breasts, with highest expression in skeletal muscle and heart (MIM, 613,543). This gene has been suggested as one of the two candidate genes for Mesomelia-Synostoses Syndrome (MMS), alongsideSULF1. However, it has a pLI = 0, indicating that heterozygocity for inactivating variants including the reported deletions and the present translocation breakpoint are likely not contributing to MSS. It is not or has as very low expression in the brain.Likewise,SULF1with a pLI = 1 is not or has as very low expression in the brain.Mesomelia-Synostoses Syndrome (MMS) is an autosomal dominant type of mesomelic dysplasia that comprises typical acral synostoses combined with ptosis, hypertelorism, palatal abnormality, congenital heart disease, and ureteral anomalies (MIM, 600,383). Only one report of a patient with MMS without a deletion in the 8q13 region has been described, with a monoallelic expression ofSULF1in fibroblasts, but with no alterations inSLCO5A1, or in any other gene tested [11]. In contrast, five unrelated patients with MMS have microdeletions in the 8q13 region, varying from 582 kb to 738 kb in size but always involvingSULF1andSLCO5A1[8,9,10,24,25]. Although both are expressed in skeletal tissues,SULF1is the candidate that might have a major influence with respect to triggering skeletal abnormalities. However, homozygous deletion ofSulf1results in milder skeletal defects in mice (reduced bone length, early ossification of vertebrae, and fusion of the vertebrae with tail vertebrae), but not the more severe spectrum including extra-skeletal features as seen in MSS [26]. Along with the general lack of loss-of-function point mutations in MSS, this suggest thatSULF1haploinsufficency alone cannot fully explain the spectrum seen in MSS.The human genome is organized into megabase-sized topological associated domains (TADs) [14] and chromatin loops [15,16] that define cis-regulatory interactions. Disruption of this 3D-organization by structural rearrangements incl. deletions, duplications, inversions and translocations, may cause developmental disorders due to placement of ectopic enhancers in neo-TADs harbouring developmental genes [27; for a review, see ref.28].Importantly, the two genes deleted in MSS,SULF1andSLCO5A1, are situated next to each other but in separate TADs (Fig.6). Hence, the MSS-associated deletions invariably remove the TAD boundary separating these two genes (Fig.6). The TAD harbouringSULF1is enriched in evolutionary conserved non-genic elements which likely include skeletal and chondrogenic enhancers (cf. theSulf1-/-mouse model) and part of this TAD (with their putative enhancers) are retained in all the MSS-deletions (Fig.6). Chromatin loops are the underlying structures mediating these mostly intra-TAD regulatory interactions. Deletion of theSULF1/SLCO5A1TAD boundary opens for novel chromatin loops within the merged neo-TAD, which may extend to the candidate constrained genesPRDM14(pLI = 0.92) andNCOA2 (NCOA2: pLI = 1), but also neo-loops that extend further into the next TAD harbouring the key developmental geneEYA1(pLI = 1). Hence, we propose ectopic enhancer adoption as an alternative and most likely explanation for MSS. Indeed, a position effect on neighbouring gene(s) was mentioned briefly as a speculative explanation in the original paper defining the 8q13 deletions in MSS [10].ConclusionThis article demonstrates once again the effectiveness of balanced structural rearrangements associated with clinical phenotypes as a tool for mapping and defining Mendelian disorders. Although the translocation is likely not contributing to the phenotype of our patient per se, the breakpoint together with the emerging data on the 3D- organization of the human genome has contributed to further delineation of a not fully understood monogenic disorder.Data availabilityAll data generated or analyzed in this study are included in this published article.ReferencesAristidou C, Koufaris C, Theodosiou A, Bak M, Mehrjouy MM, Behjati F, et al. Accurate breakpoint mapping in apparently balanced translocation families with discordant phenotypes using whole genome mate-pair sequencing. PLoS ONE. 2017;12(1):e0169935.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarTommerup N. Mendelian cytogenetics. Chromosome rearrangements associated with mendelian disorders. J Med Genet Setembro De. 1993;30(9):713–27.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarLowther C, Mehrjouy MM, Collins RL, Bak MC, Dudchenko O, Brand H et al. Balanced chromosomal rearrangements offer insights into coding and noncoding genomic features associated with developmental disorders [Internet]. medRxiv; 2022 [citado 17 de novembro de 2022]. p. 2022.02.15.22270795. Disponível em:https://www.medrxiv.org/content/https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.15.22270795v1.Greenstein RM, Reardon MP, Chan TS. An X/Autosome translocation in a girl with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (dmd): evidence for Dmd Gene localization. Pediatr Res Abril De. 1977;11(4):457–457.ArticleGoogle ScholarBarker D, Wright E, Nguyen K, Cannon L, Fain P, Goldgar D, et al. Gene for Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis is in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17. Sci 29 de maio de. 1987;236(4805):1100–2.CASGoogle Scholarde Almeida JC, Llerena Júnior JC, Gonçalves Neto JB, Jung M, Martins RR. Another example favouring the location of BPES at 3q2. J Med Genet janeiro de. 1993;30(1):86.ArticleGoogle ScholarObenauf AC, Schwarzbraun T, Auer M, Hoffmann EM, Waldispuehl-Geigl J, Ulz P, et al. Mapping of balanced chromosome translocation breakpoints to the basepair level from microdissected chromosomes. J Cell Mol Med agosto de. 2010;14(8):2078–84.ArticleGoogle ScholarVerloes A, David A. Dominant mesomelic shortness of stature with acral synostoses, umbilical anomalies, and soft palate agenesis. Am J Med Genet 16 de janeiro de. 1995;55(2):205–12.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarPfeiffer RA, Hirschfelder H, Rott HD. Specific acromesomelia with facial and renal anomalies: a new syndrome. Clin Dysmorphol janeiro de. 1995;4(1):38–43.CASGoogle ScholarIsidor B, Pichon O, Redon R, Day-Salvatore D, Hamel A, Siwicka KA, et al. Mesomelia-synostoses Syndrome results from deletion of SULF1 and SLCO5A1 genes at 8q13. Am J Hum Genet 9 de julho de. 2010;87(1):95–100.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarDardis A, Pianta A, Zampieri S, Zanin I, Bertoli M, Cazzagon M, et al. Mesomelia-Synostoses syndrome: description of a patient presenting a monoallelic expression of SULF1 without alterations in the SLCOA1 gene. Clin Genet fevereiro de. 2019;95(2):336–8.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarJiang CC, Lin LS, Long S, Ke XY, Fukunaga K, Lu YM, et al. Signalling pathways in autism spectrum disorder: mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Signal Transduct Target Ther 11 de julho de. 2022;7(1):229.ArticleGoogle ScholarMcGowan-Jordan, Hastings RJ, Moore S, Iscn. 2020: An International System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature [Internet]. [citado 22 de novembro de 2023]. Disponível em:https://www.almedina.net/iscn-2020-an-international-system-for-human-cytogenomic-nomenclature-1615486640.html.Dixon JR, Selvaraj S, Yue F, Kim A, Li Y, Shen Y, et al. Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions. Nature. 2012;485(7398):376–80.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarRao SSP, Huntley MH, Durand NC, Stamenova EK, Bochkov ID, Robinson JT, et al. A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping. Cell. 2014;159(7):1665–80.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarKrietenstein N, Abraham S, Venev SV, Abdennur N, Gibcus J, Hsieh THS, et al. Ultrastructural details of mammalian chromosome Architecture. Mol Cell 7 de maio de. 2020;78(3):554–e5657.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarAdak P, Banerjee N, Sinha S, Bandyopadhyay AK. Gamma-Aminobutyric acid type a receptor variants are Associated with Autism Spectrum disorders. J Mol Neurosci MN maio de. 2023;73(4–5):237–49.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarWhiting PJ, Bonnert TP, McKernan RM, Farrar S, Le Bourdellès B, Heavens RP, et al. Molecular and functional diversity of the expanding GABA-A receptor gene family. Ann N Y Acad Sci 30 de Abril De. 1999;868:645–53.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarRitchie RJ, Mattei MG, Lalande M. A large polymorphic repeat in the pericentromeric region of human chromosome 15q contains three partial gene duplications. Hum Mol Genet agosto de. 1998;7(8):1253–60.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarQuilez J, Guilmatre A, Garg P, Highnam G, Gymrek M, Erlich Y, et al. Polymorphic tandem repeats within gene promoters act as modifiers of gene expression and DNA methylation in humans. Nucleic Acids Res 5 de maio de. 2016;44(8):3750–62.ArticleCASGoogle ScholarButler KM, Moody OA, Schuler E, Coryell J, Alexander JJ, Jenkins A et al. De novo variants in GABRA2 and GABRA5 alter receptor function and contribute to early-onset epilepsy. Brain J Neurol. 1ode agosto de. 2018;141(8):2392–405.Hernandez CC, XiangWei W, Hu N, Shen D, Shen W, Lagrange AH et al. Altered inhibitory synapses in de novo GABRA5 and GABRA1 mutations associated with early onset epileptic encephalopathies. Brain J Neurol. 1ode julho de. 2019;142(7):1938–54.Gudmundsson S, Singer-Berk M, Watts NA, Phu W, Goodrich JK, Solomonson M, et al. Variant interpretation using population databases: lessons from gnomAD. Hum Mutat 1oDe agosto de. 2022;43(8):1012–30.Day-Salvatore D, McLean D. Blepharophimosis, hypoplastic radius, hypoplastic left heart, telecanthus, hydronephrosis, fused metacarpals, and prehensile halluces: a new syndrome? Am J Med Genet 4 de dezembro de. 1998;80(4):309–13.CASGoogle ScholarLeroy JG, Claus L, Lee B, Mortier GR. Mesomelic dysplasia with specific autopodal synostoses: a third observation and further delineation of the multiple congenital anomaly syndrome. Pediatr Pathol Mol Med fevereiro de. 2003;22(1):23–35.ArticleGoogle ScholarRatzka A, Kalus I, Moser M, Dierks T, Mundlos S, Vortkamp A. Redundant function of the heparan sulfate 6-O-endosulfatases Sulf1 and Sulf2 during skeletal development. Dev Dyn 1oDe fevereiro de. 2008;237(2):339–53.Lupiáñez DG, Kraft K, Heinrich V, et al. Disruptions of topological chromatin domains cause pathogenic rewiring of gene-enhancer interactions. Cell. 2015;161:1012–25.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarChiara Anania and Darío G Lupiáñez. Order and disorder: abnormal 3D chromatin organization in human disease. Brief Funct Genomics. 2020;19(2):128–38.https://doi.org/10.1093/bfgp/elz028.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarDownload referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank the cientific society.FundingNot applicable.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsClinical Cytogenetics Laboratory, Center for Medical Genetics/IFF/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, BrazilIngrid Bendas Feres Lima, Lúcia de Fátima Marques de Moraes, Carlos Roberto da Fonseca, Juan Clinton Llerena Junior & Elenice Ferreira BastosReference Center for Rare Diseases/IFF/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, BrazilJuan Clinton Llerena JuniorDepartment of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkMana Mehrjouy & Niels TommerupAuthorsIngrid Bendas Feres LimaView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarLúcia de Fátima Marques de MoraesView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarCarlos Roberto da FonsecaView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarJuan Clinton Llerena JuniorView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarMana MehrjouyView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarNiels TommerupView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarElenice Ferreira BastosView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsAll the authors contributed equally to this work and approved the fnal version of the manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence toElenice Ferreira Bastos.Ethics declarationsEthics approval and consent to participateThis report is a retrospective analysis of the patient’s clinical test results and does not have an impact on the patient’s clinical decision and management strategy. So ethics approval was not required. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the case details and accompanying images.Competing of interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissionsOpen AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBendas Feres Lima, I., Fátima Marques de Moraes, L.d., Roberto da Fonseca, C.et al.Mesomelia-synostoses syndrome: contiguous deletion syndrome,SULF1haploinsufficiency or enhancer adoption?.Mol Cytogenet17, 15 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13039-024-00684-2Download citationReceived:18 November 2022Accepted:16 May 2024Published:12 July 2024DOI:https://doi.org/10.1186/s13039-024-00684-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy shareable link to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywordsBalanced translocationsGABRA5Mesomelia-Synostoses syndromeSLCO5A1SULF1; enhancer adoption

---
*This content was automatically scraped by Webscraping Agent A*
