# What distinguishes patients with mass social media-induced illness presenting with Tourette-like behavior from those with Tourette syndrome? Results of a prospective cohort study.

**DOI:** 10.1007/s00406-023-01603-z
**Journal:** European archives of psychiatry and clinical neuroscience
**Date:** 2023-05-20
**Authors:** ['CarolinFremer', 'NataliaSzejko', 'AnnaPisarenko', 'MartinaHaas', 'LuiseLaudenbach', 'ClaudiaWegener', 'Kirsten RMüller-Vahl']
**Category:** tourette_syndrome
**Source:** pubmed
**Scraped by:** agent_a
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:50:38.934540
**Source URL:** https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-023-01603-z

## Abstract

Since 2019, a global increase in patients presenting with functional Tourette-like behaviors (FTB) has been observed. This has been related to the exposure of tic-related content in social media, although other factors seem to further fuel this phenomenon. Recently, we, therefore, proposed the term mass social media-induced illness (MSMI) as, in our opinion, this phenomenon constitutes a new type of mass sociogenic illness (MSI) that is in contrast to all recent outbreaks spread solely via social media. In accordance with this hypothesis, we were able to identify the host of the German YouTube channel "Gewitter im Kopf" ("Thunderstorm in the brain") as the initial virtual index case. The purpose of this paper is to present clinical characteristics of a sample of 32 patients diagnosed with MSMI-FTB compared to a large sample of patients with Tourette syndrome (TS) and other chronic tic disorders (CTD) (n = 1032) from the same center in Germany indicating clinical factors helpful to distinguish between tics in TS/CTD and MSMI-FTB. Our main findings were: in patients with MSMI-FTB compared to those with TS/CTD we found (i) a significantly higher age at onset, (ii) a significantly higher rate of females, (iii) a significantly higher rate of obscene and socially inappropriate symptoms, (iv) a significantly lower rate of comorbid ADHD, and (v) a significantly lower rate of OCD/OCB. In contrast, rates of comorbid anxiety and depression as well as reported frequencies of premonitory urges/sensations and suppressibility of symptoms did not differ between groups.

## Full Text Content

HomeEuropean Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical NeuroscienceArticleWhat distinguishes patients with mass social media-induced illness presenting with Tourette-like behavior from those with Tourette syndrome? Results of a prospective cohort studyOriginal PaperOpen accessPublished:20 May 2023Volume 274, pages 227–233, (2024)Cite this articleYou have full access to thisopen accessarticleDownload PDFEuropean Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical NeuroscienceAims and scopeSubmit manuscriptWhat distinguishes patients with mass social media-induced illness presenting with Tourette-like behavior from those with Tourette syndrome? Results of a prospective cohort studyDownload PDFCarolin FremerORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-9585-74151,Natalia SzejkoORCID:orcid.org/0000-0001-6160-92212,3,Anna Pisarenko1,Martina Haas1,Luise Laudenbach1,Claudia Wegener4&…Kirsten R. Müller-VahlORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-7181-74191Show authors3882Accesses10Citations1AltmetricExplore all metricsAbstractSince 2019, a global increase in patients presenting with functional Tourette-like behaviors (FTB) has been observed. This has been related to the exposure of tic-related content in social media, although other factors seem to further fuel this phenomenon. Recently, we, therefore, proposed the term mass social media-induced illness (MSMI) as, in our opinion, this phenomenon constitutes a new type of mass sociogenic illness (MSI) that is in contrast to all recent outbreaks spread solely via social media. In accordance with this hypothesis, we were able to identify the host of the German YouTube channel "Gewitter im Kopf" (“Thunderstorm in the brain”) as the initial virtual index case. The purpose of this paper is to present clinical characteristics of a sample of 32 patients diagnosed with MSMI-FTB compared to a large sample of patients with Tourette syndrome (TS) and other chronic tic disorders (CTD) (n= 1032) from the same center in Germany indicating clinical factors helpful to distinguish between tics in TS/CTD and MSMI-FTB. Our main findings were: in patients with MSMI-FTB compared to those with TS/CTD we found (i) a significantly higher age at onset, (ii) a significantly higher rate of females, (iii) a significantly higher rate of obscene and socially inappropriate symptoms, (iv) a significantly lower rate of comorbid ADHD, and (v) a significantly lower rate of OCD/OCB. In contrast, rates of comorbid anxiety and depression as well as reported frequencies of premonitory urges/sensations and suppressibility of symptoms did not differ between groups.Similar content being viewed by othersSudden Onset Tic and Tic-Like Presentations in Older Adolescents and AdultsArticle16 November 2022A unified Internet-delivered exposure treatment for undifferentiated somatic symptom disorder: single-group prospective feasibility trialArticleOpen access19 July 2022The somatic care of patients with comorbid mental disorders: protocol of a mixed-methods study aiming to identify barriers to and enablers of utilization of somatic healthcare (SoKo)ArticleOpen access07 June 2023Explore related subjectsDiscover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.Huntington's diseaseMedical SociologyMovement disordersNeurological DisordersParkinson's diseaseSomatoform DisorderUse our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.IntroductionStarting in spring 2019, in Germany an outbreak of functional Tourette-like behaviors (FTB) has been observed [1]. Soon thereafter it became clear that patients with FTB with very similar symptomatology are presenting in specialist Tourette centers in many countries worldwide [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11]. Today, there is general agreement among experts that this outbreak is closely related to popular videos shown on social media platforms such as YouTube and TikTok [8,9]. In Germany, the German-speaking YouTube channel "Gewitter im Kopf" (“Thunderstorm in the brain”) could be identified as most influential because of a remarkable symptom overlap between patients and the channel host [1]. Claiming to suffer from extreme Tourette syndrome (TS), in his videos he purports to educate about this disorder [12]. In English-speaking countries however other influencers have been identified as most influential such as the British Evie Meg (“thistrippyhippie”) and [13] the Danish Stine Sara [14].Based on recent literature, a clear symptom overlap between individuals affected is obvious with relatively abrupt onset of mainly complex “tic-like” symptoms often accompanied by socially inappropriate behavior in patients at teenage age [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11]. Interestingly, with some minor country-specific differences, not only the patients affected, but also social media influencers show remarkable similarities presenting mainly with complex, stereotyped movements at arms and body and vocalizations dominated by swear words, comments, and insults [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11].Contrary to FTB, tics are rapid, repetitive, non-rhythmic movements or vocalizations [15]. They can be divided into motor vs. vocal and simple vs. complex tics. Motor tics follow a typical and very characteristic rostro-caudal distribution. Since TS is regarded as a neurodevelopmental disorder, tics start on average at the age of 5–7 years [16]. The onset is slow most typically with simple motor tics such as eye blinking, grimacing, or head jerks followed by simple vocal tics such as throat clearing on average 2 years later [17]. Peak tic severity is reached in most patients at the age of 10 to 12 years [18]. In the majority of patients, comorbid conditions occur such as obsessive–compulsive behavior/disorder (OCB/OCD), attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), depression, and anxiety. For still unknown reasons, males are 3–4 times more commonly affected than females [19].Only recently, we presented for the first time a more in-depth characterization of a large cohort of patients with mass social media-induced illness (MSMI) [20] as a new type of mass sociogenic illness (MSI) spread only via social media. Unlike former “classical” outbreaks of MSI dating way back in history [21], for MSMI outbreaks face to face contact between individuals is not necessary, since they are centered around a virtual index case. In our recent study [20], we identified timely-related psychological stressors, unconscious intrapsychic conflicts, and/or structural deficits in all patients suggesting these parameters as predisposing factors for MSMI-FTB. In addition, the majority of patients suffered from further psychiatric symptoms, most commonly OCB, anxiety, depression, and problems with social interactions. In line with recent reports [6,10], in almost half of the patients pre-existing TS was diagnosed suggesting the presence of tics as another independent predisposing factor for the development of MSMI that may explain the specific phenotype of the current outbreak presenting with FTB.Because of some similarities between tics in TS and FTB, it is of utmost importance to identify factors that enable differentiation between these conditions, since both diagnoses still have to be made merely clinically. Moreover, symptoms require different treatment approaches, which can only be applied after a correct diagnosis has been made to alleviate the usually high impairment of those affected. According to the results of a poll performed among TS experts conducted at the 14th European Conference on Tourette Syndrome & Tic Disorders in June 2022 by the European Society for the Study of Tourette Syndrome (ESSTS), only 50% of TS experts have confidence being able to differentiate tics/TS from FTB – even after having attended lectures on this topic (unpublished data). Thus, for general neurologists and psychiatrists the differential diagnosis may be even more challenging. Accordingly, in 2021, a first study was published based on a very small German sample revealing the following differences between tics/TS and FTB: type and age of onset, symptom fluctuation and deterioration, complexity of symptoms, sex proportion, comorbidities, medical treatment, socially inappropriate behaviors/coprophenomena, self-injurious behaviors, hospitalization, and school absenteeism [10]. Thereafter, further studies aiming to identify differences between TS and (MSMI-)FTB have been published, but all of these are limited by either rather small sample sizes (FTB: number of patients ranging from 9 to 22, chronic tic disorder (CTD)/TS: numbers of patients between 13 to 270), the inclusion of patients with FTB with no clear relationship to social media use, or utilization of only very few clinical items [5,6,10,11,22].Here, we present clinical characteristics of a sample of 32 patients diagnosed with MSMI-FTB compared to a large sample of patients with TS and other CTD (n= 1032) from the same center indicating clinical factors helpful to distinguish between tics/TS and MSMI-FTB. Our second goal was to formulate clues that could help clinicians in the differential diagnosis between these two disorders. We hypothesized that patients with MSMI-FTB differ in many ways from patients with TS such as later age of symptoms’ onset, female preponderance, atypical or absent premonitory sensations, and higher prevalence of obscene and socially inappropriate symptoms.MethodsBetween 5/2019 and 9/2021, 32 patients (mean age: 20.1 years, range: 11–53 years, median age: 18 years,n= 16 females (50%)) diagnosed with MSMI-FTB at our Tourette outpatient clinic agreed to participate. All patients underwent a neuropsychiatric examination by a neurologist and psychiatrist with more than 20 years of clinical experience with patients with tics (KMV) who confirmed the diagnosis. Using a detailed semi-structured clinical and psychological interview composed by the authors and conducted by a psychologist with extensive experience with TS (CF), we took record of demographic data such as sex, age at evaluation, and age at symptom onset. In addition, a detailed history was taken of all new-onset symptoms in terms of suppressibility, premonitory sensations, socially inappropriate behaviors including insults, swear words, and other socially inappropriate or obscene behaviors as well as comorbid psychiatric symptoms. All current and recent symptoms reported by patients, parents, and observed during the examination were documented. Interviews were conducted together with the parents, depending on the age and whether patients were able to report in detail themselves. For further details regarding the study protocol please refer to [20]. Characteristics in patients with MSMI-FTB were compared to a large sample of patients with TS/CTD (n= 1032 including 529 children, mean age: 20.9 years, range: 4–72 years, sex ratio m/f: 3.4:1). For further details regarding this sample please refer to [23]. The study was reviewed and approved by Local Ethics Committee at Hannover Medical School (No. 8995_BO_S_2020).Statistical analysesUsing Excel (Microsoft Office Professional Plus 2016 version) frequencies, means, medians, and distribution measures were calculated. R (version 4.1.1) was used for conducting analyses for group comparisons [24].T-tests were performed for interval-scaled dependent variables within group comparisons and Fisher's exact tests for dichotomous dependent variables. For group comparisons,p-values of significant results were conservatively corrected for multiple comparisons according to Bonferroni (pc). Additionally, as measures of the effect size of significant results Cohen's d and the bias-corrected Cramer's V were calculated.ResultsGeneral characteristicsFor statistical analyses we assigned patients to their biological sex, while exactly half of our sample of 32 included patients was female (n= 16; 50%) giving a ratio of 1:1. On average patients were 20.1 years (range: 11–53 years, median age: 18 years) old at time of evaluation. On average FTB started 11 months earlier at the age of 19.2 years (range: 10–53 years, median age: 17 years). Compared to patients with TS/CTD (n= 1032), in patients with MSMI-FTB we found (i) a significantly higher age at onset (with a large effect) (t(1062) = 18.63,pc< 0.001,d= 2.53) and (ii) a significantly higher rate of females (with a small effect) (pc= 0.01,V= 0.11). No significant differences were found with respect to age at evaluation (pc= 1).Clinical characteristics of FTB and comorbiditiesWhen comparing for clinical characteristics, in patients with MSMI-FTB we found a significantly higher rate of obscene words and other socially inappropriate symptoms (with a medium effect) (pc< 0.001,V= 26). No significant differences were found with respect to reported frequencies of premonitory urges/sensations (pc= 0.530) and suppressibility of tics and MSMI-FTB, respectively (pc= 1) (if assessed as dichotomous variables (yes/no)).With regard to comorbidities we found (i) a significantly lower rate of comorbid ADHD (with a small effect) (pc= 0.003,V= 12) and (ii) a significantly lower rate of OCD/OCB (with a small effect) (pc= 0.046,V= 0.09) in patients with MSMI-FTB. No significant differences were found with respect to presence of comorbid anxiety (pc= 1) and depression (pc= 1). For further details see Table1.Table 1 Comparison between patients with mass social media-induced illness presenting with functional Tourette-like behavior (MSMI-FTB) (n= 32) and a large sample of patients with Tourette syndrome (TS) or other chronic tic disorders (CTD) (n= 1032)Full size tableDiscussionIn this study, we further elaborated differences in clinical characteristics between MSMI-FTB and tics in patients with TS/CTD. Based on our data and in contrast to tics, MSMI-FTB is characterized by (i) an onset of symptoms at teeange age or in young adulthood and thus several years after typical onset of tics in preschool age, (ii) a higher rate of females, (iii) a much higher occurrence of socially inappropriate and obscene behaviors compared to coprophenomena in TS/CTD; (iv) a lower prevalence of comorbid ADHD, and (v) a lower prevalence of OCD/OCB compared to TS/CTD. In line with recent work [5,6,8,10], we were not able to identifyonesingle factor that allows a clear differentiation between (MSMI-)FTB and tics/TS/CTD. Similarly to Paulus et al. [10] and Pringsheim et al. [5,6], we detected no differences with respect to reported frequencies of premonitory urges/sensations and suppressabilty of symptoms. Finally, we found no differences in frequencies of anxiety and depression, which were common comorbidities in both groups of patients.So far, only four other studies have been published comparing directly clinical characteristics of patients with MSMI-FTB and tics/TS [5,6,10,11]. All these studies, however, are limited by very small sample sizes. Interestingly, in the only other German study including only 13 patients in each patient group, similar results have been reported with respect to age at onset [10]. Different to our study, however, in this study no differences were found concerning prevalance rates of comorbidites including ADHD and OCD as well as frequencies of socially inappropriate behavior/coprophenomena, premonitory sensations, and suppressability, which might possibly be related to the small sample size. Similar to our study (male to female ratio = 1:1), a relatively large proportion of patients were males (62%), while in all other studies [5,6,11], there was a definite predominance of females. It has been speculated that this is due to the fact that in Germany the (virtual) index case relevant for the MSMI outbreak was male, while in all other regions of the world presumable index cases were female [20].Compared to the other studies outside of Germany [5,6], in patients with FTB compared to those with TS the following differences were found: younger age at time of investigation, but older age at onset, predominance of females, higher severity scores of motor and vocal symptoms, higher impairment scores, more complex arm/hand motor movements, more complex vocalizations, more obscene words, higher scores on self-report measures for ADHD, OCD, anxiety, and depression as well as more frequent diagnosis of depression. These discrepancies might be related to methodological factors such as partly retrospective data collection, small sample sizes, different male to female ratios, inclusion of adult versus pediatric or mixed populations, and different measurements. In future studies, therefore, specific attention should be drawn to psychiatric comorbidities using adequate instruments.In line with all recent reports [5,6,10,11], we found in patients with MSMI-FTB compared to patients with TS/CTD a much higher frequency of complex vocalization, obscene words, and socially inappropriate and obscene behaviors. Remarkably, in line with recent reports [5,6,10] we found no differences in patients with MSMI-FTB compared to those with TS/CTD with respect to reported frequencies of premonitory urges/sensations and suppressibility of symptoms. Based on older studies in patients with “functional tics” (without any influence from social media) [25,26,27,28], it was believed that “functional tics” are only rarely accompanied by premonitory sensations and can typically not be suppressed voluntarily. In contrast, these two factors have been considered as hallmarks of tics [23]. Based on our data, patients’ reports on theprevalenceof premonitory sensations and suppressibility cannot be regarded as reliable factors that can be used for differentiation of MSMI-FTB from tics. However, in a recent study from our group, we were able to demonstrate that instead thekindof descriptions of premonitory sensations and supressibility including duration, characteristics, and influencing factors largely differs in patients with MSMI-FTB compared to those in patients with TS and can reliably be used for differentitaion between these two phenomena [20].Because of the disparities between tics and MSMI-FTB, we suggest not to use the term “tics” when reporting and describing FTB. In our opinion this is of particular importance in those patients who suffer from both conditions [20]. Furthermore, from a historical perspective, for many years it was believed that tics in TS represent a functional (“psychogenic”) symptom [29] and therefore a clear distinction between tics and FTB should also be expressed in the terminology used. Since the vast majority of patients with MSMI-FTB presents with movements, vocalizations, and socially inappropriate behaviors, which also stays in line with common opinion about TS in general population, we suggest to use the term “Tourette-like” instead of “tic-like” behavior since it encompasses all these symptoms.The following limitations of our study have to be considered: (i) a selection bias cannot be excluded as probably only patients with more severe phenotypes presented to our center; (ii) although this is the largest sample comparing clinical characteristics of MSMI-FTB with TS so far, the sample size of patients with MSMI-FTB was still relatively small; (iii) our TS/CTD sample was very large and included more than 1000 patients. However, this sample was collected over a long time period several years ago and was not collected prospectively to be used as a control group for this study. Therefore, we were not able to compare further clinical features of MSMI-FTB such as type of symptom onset since there is no record of these characteristics in our TS/CTD sample; and (iv) due to lack of information on prevalence rates separately for OCD and OCB in the MSMI-FTB sample, we were able to compare only combined numbers for OCD/OCB in both groups. Since the prevalence of 72% of OCD/OCB in our TS/CTD sample can be considered as representative [30,31,32,33,34], different frequencies can be regarded as robust data and thus clinically relevant.In addition, the following strengths of our studies can be highlighted: firstly, we used a prospective design for data collection of the MSMI-FTB sample; secondly, in both samples, TS/CTD and MSMI-FTB, we included both children and adults, while in most other studies mainly children and teenagers had been included [3,4,6,8]; and thirdly, while in this study, we included only patients, where both a clear temporal link between symptom onset and use of the YouTube channel “Gewitter im Kopf” could be demonstrated and in addition a clear symptom overlap between patients and the channel host was obvious, in most other studies, patients with FTB had been included even in the absence of such a clear connection. Thus, it can be speculated that reported samples may differ slightly, since in the same time period we saw in addition to patients with MSMI-FTB several further patients with FTB, but without this obvious interrelationship with social media. Those further patients presented either with the „new variant” of FTB with rapid onset and mainly complex movements and vocalizations but without a clear connection to the YouTube channel „Gewitter im Kopf” or with the more “classic variant” of FTB as seen for many years and described earlier [26,27,28,35,36]. Based on our clinical experience and in line with the literature [20,37], patients with the “classic variant” of FTB show no or much less swear words, insults, and comments, no or much less socially inappropriate behaviors, an overall much lower number of movements and vocalizations, and much less influential and triggering factors, but a higher number and more severe self-injurious behaviors.Overall, this study has shown in line with other studies that there are distinct features to differentiate MSMI-FTB from tics/TS/CTD. Special attention should be paid to the kind and number of obscene words and other socially inappropriate behaviors compared to coprophenomena in TS/CTD. Other important distinguishing factors are later age at onset and larger number of females affected. Although the pattern on psychiatric comorbidities may differ, based on current data this cannot be used for differentiation. Finally, premonitory sensations and suppressibility are reported in similar frequencies in MSMI-FTB compared to TS/CTD, and the kind of descriptions largely differs.Data availabilityThe data that support the findings of this study are available within the paper. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.ReferencesMüller-Vahl KR, Pisarenko A, Jakubovski E, Fremer C (2022) Stop that! It’s not Tourette’s but a new type of mass sociogenic illness. Brain 145:476–480.https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab316ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarZea Vera A, Bruce A, Garris J et al (2022) The phenomenology of Tics and Tic-like behavior in TikTok. Pediatr Neurol 130:14–20.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.02.003ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarButs S, Duncan M, Owen T et al (2022) Paediatric tic-like presentations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Arch Dis Child 107:e17–e17.https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2021-323002ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarHeyman I, Liang H, Hedderly T (2021) COVID-19 related increase in childhood tics and tic-like attacks. Arch Dis Child 106:420–421.https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2021-321748ArticleGoogle ScholarPringsheim T, Martino D (2021) Rapid onset of functional tic-like behaviours in young adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Euro J of Neurology 28:3805–3808.https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.15034ArticleGoogle ScholarPringsheim T, Ganos C, McGuire JF et al (2021) Rapid onset functional Tic-like behaviors in young females during theCOVID-19 pandemic. Mov Disord 36:2707–2713.https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28778ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarHull M, Parnes M, Jankovic J (2021) Increased incidence of functional (Psychogenic) movement disorders in children and adults amid the COVID-19 pandemic: a cross-sectional Study. Neurol Clin Pract 11:e686–e690.https://doi.org/10.1212/CPJ.0000000000001082ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarHull M, Parnes M (2021) Tics andTikTok: functional tics spread through social media. Mov Disord Clin Pract 8:1248–1252.https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.13267ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarOlvera C, Stebbins GT, Goetz CG, Kompoliti K (2021)TikTokTics: a pandemic within a pandemic. Mov Disord Clin Pract 8:1200–1205.https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.13316ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarPaulus T, Bäumer T, Verrel J et al (2021) Pandemic Tic-like behaviors following social media consumption. Mov Disord 36:2932–2935.https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28800ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarHan VX, Kozlowska K, Kothur K et al (2022) Rapid onset functional tic-like behaviours in children and adolescents duringCOVID-19: Clinical features, assessment and biopsychosocial treatment approach. J Paediatrics Child Health 58:1181–1187.https://doi.org/10.1111/jpc.15932ArticleGoogle ScholarZimmermann J Gewitter im Kopf - Leben mit Tourette - YouTube.https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCh2Nc3OwjSwuXrUdFNXqFbQ. Accessed 21 Feb 2023This Trippy Hippie - YouTube.https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCJHvN0zYgO2ZLjePERRLjKQ. Accessed 21 Feb 2023user1166807721295 (@stine_sara_tourette). In: TikTok.https://www.tiktok.com/@stine_sara_tourette. Accessed 21 Feb 2023Association AP (2013) DSM-5: Diagnostic And Statistical Manual Of Mental Disorders, 5th edn. American Psychiatric Publishing, WashingtonBookGoogle ScholarBloch MH, Leckman JF (2009) Clinical course of Tourette syndrome. J Psychosom Res 67:497–501.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2009.09.002ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLudolph AG, Roessner V, Münchau A, Müller-Vahl K (2012) Tourette Syndrome and other Tic disorders in childhood, adolescence and adulthood. Deutsches Ärzteblatt Int.https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2012.0821ArticleGoogle ScholarErenberg G, Cruse RP, David Rothner A (1987) The natural history of Tourette syndrome: a follow-up study. Ann Neurol 22:383–385.https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410220317ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarRobertson MM (2008) The prevalence and epidemiology of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome. Part 1: the epidemiological and prevalence studies. J Psychosom Res 65:461–472.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2008.03.006ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarFremer C, Szejko N, Pisarenko A et al (2022) Mass social media-induced illness presenting with Tourette-like behavior. Front Psychiatry 13:963769.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.963769ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBartholomew RE, Wessely S (2002) Protean nature of mass sociogenic illness: From possessed nuns to chemical and biological terrorism fears. Br J Psychiatry 180:300–306.https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.180.4.300ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarLarsh TR, Wu SW, Gilbert DL (2022) Comparison of impairment in functional tic disorders versus Tourette syndrome. Pediatr Neurol 134:83–84.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2022.06.013ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarSambrani T, Jakubovski E, Müller-Vahl KR (2016) New insights into clinical characteristics of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome: findings in 1032 patients from a single german center. Front Neurosci.https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00415ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarR: The R Project for Statistical Computing.https://www.r-project.org/. Accessed 21 Feb 2023Janik P, Milanowski L, Szejko N (2014) Psychogenic tics: clinical characteristics and prevalence. Psychiatr Pol 48:835–845PubMedGoogle ScholarGanos C, Martino D, Espay AJ et al (2019) Tics and functional tic-like movements: Can we tell them apart? Neurology 93:750–758.https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008372ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarDemartini B, Ricciardi L, Parees I et al (2015) A positive diagnosis of functional (psychogenic) tics. Eur J Neurol 22:527-e36.https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.12609ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarBaizabal-Carvallo JF, Jankovic J (2014) The clinical features of psychogenic movement disorders resembling tics. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 85:573–575.https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2013-305594ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarShapiro AK, Shapiro E (1968) Treatment of Gilles de la Tourette’s Syndrome with Haloperidol. Br J Psychiatry 114:345–350.https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.114.508.345ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarFreeman RD, Fast DK, Burd L et al (2000) An international perspective on Tourette syndrome: selected findings from 3,500 individuals in 22 countries. Dev Med Child Neurol 42:436–447.https://doi.org/10.1017/s0012162200000839ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarHirschtritt ME, Lee PC, Pauls DL et al (2015) Lifetime prevalence, age of risk, and genetic relationships of comorbid psychiatric disorders in Tourette syndrome. JAMA Psychiat 72:325.https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2650ArticleGoogle ScholarCavanna AE (2018) Gilles de la Tourette syndrome as a paradigmatic neuropsychiatric disorder. CNS Spectr 23:213–218.https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852918000834ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarCavanna AE (2018) The neuropsychiatry of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome: The état de l’art. Revue Neurologique 174:621–627.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2018.06.006ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarFerrao YA, de Alvarenga PG, Hounie AG et al (2022) The phenomenology of obsessive-compulsive symptoms in Tourette syndrome. Tourette syndrome, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, pp 45–64Google ScholarGanos C, Edwards MJ, Müller-Vahl K (2016) “I swear it is Tourette’s!”: On functional coprolalia and other tic-like vocalizations. Psychiatry Res 246:821–826.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2016.10.021ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGanos C, Erro R, Cavanna AE, Bhatia KP (2014) Functional tics and echophenomena. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 20:1440–1441.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.10.001ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMüller-Vahl K, Pisarenko A, Fremer C, et al Functional tic-like behaviors: a common comorbidity in patients with Tourette syndromeDownload referencesFundingOpen Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsClinic of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, 30625, Hannover, GermanyCarolin Fremer, Anna Pisarenko, Martina Haas, Luise Laudenbach & Kirsten R. Müller-VahlDepartment of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, PolandNatalia SzejkoDepartment of Bioethics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, PolandNatalia SzejkoDepartment of Audiovisual Media Studies, Film University Babelsberg, Potsdam, GermanyClaudia WegenerAuthorsCarolin FremerView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarNatalia SzejkoView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarAnna PisarenkoView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarMartina HaasView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarLuise LaudenbachView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarClaudia WegenerView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarKirsten R. Müller-VahlView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsCF contributed to conception and design of the study, organization of the database, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. NS contributed to data analysis and interpretation. AP contributed to the conception of the study, organization of the database, and data analysis. MH contributed to the statistical analysis of the study. LL contributed to the organization of the database and the collection of the data. CW contributed to the conception and design of the study. KMV contributed to conception and design of the study and collection, analysis and interpretation of data. All authors contributed to manuscript revision, read, and approved the submitted version.Corresponding authorCorrespondence toCarolin Fremer.Ethics declarationsConflict of interestCarolin Fremer, Natalia Szejko, Anna Pisarenko, Martina Haas, Luise Laudenbach and Claudia Wegener declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Kirsten Müller-Vahl has received financial or material research support from EU (FP7-HEALTH-2011 No. 278367, FP7-PEOPLE-2012-ITN No. 316978) DFG: GZ MU 1527/3–1 and GZ MU 1527/3–2, BMBF: 01KG1421, National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Tourette Gesellschaft Deutschland e.V. Else-Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung, GW pharmaceuticals, Almirall Hermal GmbH, Abide Therapeutics, and Therapix Biosiences. She has received consultant's honoraria from Abide Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH, Bionorica Ethics GmbH, CannaMedical Pharma GmbH, Canopy Grouth, Columbia Care, CTC Communications Corp., Demecan, Eurox Deutschland GmbH, Global Praxis Group Limited, IMC Germany, Lundbeck, Sanity Group, Stadapharm GmbH, Synendos Therapeutics AG, and Tilray. She is an advisory/scientific board member for CannaMedical Pharma GmbH, Bionorica Ethics GmbH, CannaXan GmbH, Canopy Growth, Columbia Care, IMC Germany, Leafly Deutschland GmbH, Sanity Group, Syqe Medical Ltd., Therapix Biosciences Ltd., and Wayland Group. She has received speaker’s fees from Aphria Deutschland GmbH, Almirall, Cogitando GmbH, Emalex, Eurox Deutschland GmbH, Ever pharma GmbH, Meinhardt Congress GmbH, PR Berater, Spectrum Therapeutics GmbH, Takeda GmbH, Tilray, Wayland Group. She has received royalties from Deutsches Ärzteblatt, Der Neurologe und Psychiater, Elsevier, Medizinisch Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft Berlin, and Kohlhammer. She served as a guest editor for Frontiers in Neurology on the research topic “The neurobiology and genetics of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome: new avenues through large-scale collaborative projects”, is an associate editor for “Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research” and an Editorial Board Member of “Medical Cannabis and Cannabinoids” und “MDPI-Reports” and a Scientific board member for “Zeitschrift für Allgemeinmedizin”.Ethics approvalThe study was reviewed and approved by Local Ethics Committee at Hannover Medical School (No. 8995_BO_S_2020).Consent to participateWritten informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the participants and their legal guardian.Rights and permissionsOpen AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleFremer, C., Szejko, N., Pisarenko, A.et al.What distinguishes patients with mass social media-induced illness presenting with Tourette-like behavior from those with Tourette syndrome? Results of a prospective cohort study.Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci274, 227–233 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-023-01603-zDownload citationReceived:13 October 2022Accepted:29 March 2023Published:20 May 2023Issue date:February 2024DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-023-01603-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy shareable link to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywordsTourette-like behaviorSocial mediaMass sociogenic illnessFunctional movement disordersTourette syndromeProfilesNatalia SzejkoView author profileKirsten R. Müller-VahlView author profileUse our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.Advertisement Sudden Onset Tic and Tic-Like Presentations in Older Adolescents and AdultsArticle16 November 2022 A unified Internet-delivered exposure treatment for undifferentiated somatic symptom disorder: single-group prospective feasibility trialArticleOpen access19 July 2022 The somatic care of patients with comorbid mental disorders: protocol of a mixed-methods study aiming to identify barriers to and enablers of utilization of somatic healthcare (SoKo)ArticleOpen access07 June 2023

---
*This content was automatically scraped by Webscraping Agent A*
