# When a Sibling Has Autism: Narrative Review of Interventions for Typically Developing Siblings.

**Authors:** ['KarishmaGodara', 'VaibhavPatil', 'NishaPhakey']  
**Journal:** Indian journal of psychological medicine  
**Date:** 2024-05-10  
**DOI:** 10.1177/02537176231176404  
**Category:** asd  
**Source:** pubmed  
**Scraped by:** agent_b  
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:33:57.342304  

## Abstract

Being a typically developing sibling to a child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD-Sib) can be associated with several behavioral and mental health problems. With this understanding, researchers are beginning to focus on sibling-oriented interventions. This review seeks to evaluate the current literature on such interventions. We searched digital databases and identified eight relevant studies. The sample (n = 247) had an age range of 4-16 years. The outcomes were generally positive, with improvements in different facets of ASD-Sibs. Results differed due to varied intervention styles, outcome variables, methods, and samples. Our findings highlight the potential for improvement in ASD-Sib's knowledge of autism and their psychological functioning and hence call for further research with robust methods.

## Full Text

When a Sibling Has Autism: Narrative Review of Interventions for Typically Developing Siblings - PubMed This site needs JavaScript to work properly. Please enable it to take advantage of the complete set of features! Clipboard, Search History, and several other advanced features are temporarily unavailable. Skip to main page content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it’s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Log in Show account info Close Account Logged in as: username Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation Search: Search Advanced Create alert Create RSS Clipboard User Guide Found 1 result for 10.1177/02537176231176404 Save Email Send to Clipboard My BibliographyCollectionsCitation manager Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Save citation to file Format: Summary (text) PubMed PMID Abstract (text) CSV Create file Cancel Email citation Email address has not been verified. Go to My NCBI account settings to confirm your email and then refresh this page. To: Subject: Body: Format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) MeSH and other data Send email Cancel Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Add to My Bibliography My Bibliography Unable to load your delegates due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Your saved search Name of saved search: Search terms: 10.1177/02537176231176404 Test search terms Would you like email updates of new search results? Saved Search Alert Radio Buttons Yes No Email: (change) Frequency: Monthly Weekly Daily Which day? The first Sunday The first Monday The first Tuesday The first Wednesday The first Thursday The first Friday The first Saturday The first day The first weekday Which day? Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Report format: Summary Summary (text) Abstract Abstract (text) PubMed Send at most: 1 item 5 items 10 items 20 items 50 items 100 items 200 items Send even when there aren't any new results Optional text in email: Save Cancel Create a file for external citation management software Create file Cancel Your RSS Feed Name of RSS Feed: Number of items displayed: 5 10 15 20 50 100 Create RSS Cancel RSS Link Copy Full text links Free PMC article Full text links ActionsCiteCollectionsAdd to CollectionsCreate a new collectionAdd to an existing collection Name your collection: Name must be less than 100 characters Choose a collection: Unable to load your collection due to an errorPlease try again Add Cancel PermalinkPermalinkCopyDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Page navigation Title & authors Abstract Conflict of interest statement Figures References Publication types LinkOut - more resources Title & authors Abstract Conflict of interest statement Figures References Publication types LinkOut - more resources Filters applied. Clear filters Review Indian J Psychol Med Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Mar;46(2):103-109. doi: 10.1177/02537176231176404. Epub 2023 Jul 14. When a Sibling Has Autism: Narrative Review of Interventions for Typically Developing Siblings Karishma Godara 1 , Vaibhav Patil 2 , Nisha Phakey 3 Affiliations Expand Affiliations 1 National Drug-Dependence Treatment Centre and Dept. of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 2 Dept. of Psychiatry & NDDTC, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 3 Dept. of Clinical Psychology, Amity University, Punjab, India. PMID: 38725717 PMCID: PMC11076939 DOI: 10.1177/02537176231176404 Item in Clipboard Review When a Sibling Has Autism: Narrative Review of Interventions for Typically Developing Siblings Karishma Godara et al. Indian J Psychol Med. 2024 Mar. Show details Display options Display options Format Abstract PubMed PMID Indian J Psychol Med Actions Search in PubMed Search in NLM Catalog Add to Search . 2024 Mar;46(2):103-109. doi: 10.1177/02537176231176404. Epub 2023 Jul 14. Authors Karishma Godara 1 , Vaibhav Patil 2 , Nisha Phakey 3 Affiliations 1 National Drug-Dependence Treatment Centre and Dept. of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 2 Dept. of Psychiatry & NDDTC, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 3 Dept. of Clinical Psychology, Amity University, Punjab, India. PMID: 38725717 PMCID: PMC11076939 DOI: 10.1177/02537176231176404 Item in Clipboard Full text links CiteDisplay options Display options Format AbstractPubMedPMID Abstract Being a typically developing sibling to a child with autism spectrum disorder (ASD-Sib) can be associated with several behavioral and mental health problems. With this understanding, researchers are beginning to focus on sibling-oriented interventions. This review seeks to evaluate the current literature on such interventions. We searched digital databases and identified eight relevant studies. The sample (n = 247) had an age range of 4-16 years. The outcomes were generally positive, with improvements in different facets of ASD-Sibs. Results differed due to varied intervention styles, outcome variables, methods, and samples. Our findings highlight the potential for improvement in ASD-Sib's knowledge of autism and their psychological functioning and hence call for further research with robust methods. Keywords: Asperger’s syndrome; Autism spectrum disorder; sibling-oriented interventions; typically developing siblings. © 2023 The Author(s). PubMed Disclaimer Conflict of interest statement The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Figures Figure 1.. Flow Diagram Displaying the Selection… Figure 1.. Flow Diagram Displaying the Selection of Articles. Figure 1.. Flow Diagram Displaying the Selection of Articles. See this image and copyright information in PMC References WHO. Autism spectrum disorders, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/autism-spectrum-disorders (accessed December 31, 2021). American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th ed; American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Lord C, Sabbagh M, Baird G, et al.. Autism spectrum disorder. Lancet Lond Engl, 2018; 392: 508. - PMC - PubMed Begum R, Mamin FA. Impact of autism spectrum disorder on family. Autism-Open Access, 2019; 9: 1–6. Meadan H, Halle JW, and Ebata AT. Families with children who have autism spectrum disorder. Except Child, 2010; 77: 7–36. Show all 32 references Publication types Review Actions Search in PubMed Search in MeSH Add to Search LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Europe PubMed Central Ovid Technologies, Inc. PubMed Central Miscellaneous NCI CPTAC Assay Portal Full text links [x] Free PMC article [x] Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Send To Clipboard Email Save My Bibliography Collections Citation Manager [x] NCBI Literature Resources MeSH PMC Bookshelf Disclaimer The PubMed wordmark and PubMed logo are registered trademarks of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Unauthorized use of these marks is strictly prohibited. Follow NCBI Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Connect with NLM Twitter SM-Facebook SM-Youtube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov
