# Surveying the Language Switching Behaviours of Multilingual Autistic and Non-Autistic Adults.

**DOI:** 10.1007/s10803-025-07078-2
**Journal:** Journal of autism and developmental disorders
**Date:** 2025-10-18
**Authors:** ['Sarah KCrockford', 'Jenny LGibson', 'NapoleonKatsos']
**Category:** asd
**Source:** pubmed
**Scraped by:** agent_a
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T11:06:33.175048
**Source URL:** https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-025-07078-2

## Abstract

Whilst research in multilingualism and autism is increasing, there is still a gap when it comes to understanding how multilingual autistic individuals use their multiple languages. The aim of this research was to survey these linguistic behaviours from a self-report perspective and compare them to non-autistic multilingual individuals.
We collected data from 364 participants of which 177 (autistic = 98; mean age = 44.5, non-autistic = 79; mean age = 42.2) were included in the final analysis. Multilingual usage and switching behaviour were measured through an online questionnaire made available on Qualtrics, developed for the purpose of this research.
The questionnaire revealed that autistic participants rated themselves as more multilingual, based on number of languages known, and used their respective languages more than non-autistic participants, although they reported switching between their languages as more effortful than non-autistic participants. A large portion of autistic individuals also reported using a non-native language daily and a similar number of autistic and non-autistic participants reported having lived in a country where their first or second language was spoken. Overall, autistic participants reported comparable or more multilingual language usage than non-autistic participants.
The results of this research demonstrate that speaking autistic adults are, as one might intuitively expect, living active multilingual lives comparable to their typical peers. Future research should further investigate the rapport autistic multilingual individuals have with their linguistic communities via their language usage and the cognitive flexibility that may be associated with living multilingual and cross-national lives.

## Full Text Content

HomeJournal of Autism and Developmental DisordersArticleSurveying the Language Switching Behaviours of Multilingual Autistic and Non-Autistic AdultsOriginal ArticleOpen accessPublished:18 October 2025(2025)Cite this articleYou have full access to thisopen accessarticleDownload PDFJournal of Autism and Developmental DisordersAims and scopeSubmit manuscriptSurveying the Language Switching Behaviours of Multilingual Autistic and Non-Autistic AdultsDownload PDFSarah K. CrockfordORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-0288-57681,2,3,Jenny L. Gibson3&Napoleon Katsos262Accesses15Altmetric2MentionsExplore all metricsAbstractPurposeWhilst research in multilingualism and autism is increasing, there is still a gap when it comes to understanding how multilingual autistic individuals use their multiple languages. The aim of this research was to survey these linguistic behaviours from a self-report perspective and compare them to non-autistic multilingual individuals.MethodsWe collected data from 364 participants of which 177 (autistic = 98; mean age = 44.5, non-autistic = 79; mean age = 42.2) were included in the final analysis. Multilingual usage and switching behaviour were measured through an online questionnaire made available on Qualtrics, developed for the purpose of this research.ResultsThe questionnaire revealed that autistic participants rated themselves as more multilingual, based on number of languages known, and used their respective languages more than non-autistic participants, although they reported switching between their languages as more effortful than non-autistic participants. A large portion of autistic individuals also reported using a non-native language daily and a similar number of autistic and non-autistic participants reported having lived in a country where their first or second language was spoken. Overall, autistic participants reported comparable or more multilingual language usage than non-autistic participants.ConclusionsThe results of this research demonstrate that speaking autistic adults are, as one might intuitively expect, living active multilingual lives comparable to their typical peers. Future research should further investigate the rapport autistic multilingual individuals have with their linguistic communities via their language usage and the cognitive flexibility that may be associated with living multilingual and cross-national lives.Similar content being viewed by othersShould Parents Only Use One Language with Their Autistic Children? The Relations Between Multilingualism, Children‘s Social Skills, and Parent-Child CommunicationArticleOpen access29 May 2024Providing Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Language Assessment Services for Multilingual Children with Developmental Language Disorder: a Scoping ReviewArticle09 November 2022Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Autism Identification Among Multilingual YouthChapter© 2025Explore related subjectsDiscover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.BilingualismLanguage and YouthLanguage ChangeLanguage DisordersMultilingualismSociolinguisticsUse our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.IntroductionAutism is a condition characterised by a range of difficulties and differences, including in executive function, theory of mind, and pragmatic language (Friedman & Sterling,2019), which have the potential to influence multilingual autistic people’s language usage. In this paper, we will consistently use the term ‘multilingual’ to encompass anyone who is a speaker of at least two languages, which also includes bilinguals, except for in our questionnaire items, where we used the term ‘bilingual’ as it is a term we anticipated being more likely to be understood by our study participants. Although there is growing literature focussing on autistic multilinguals, most research still concerns childhood, with a very limited focus on adolescence and adulthood (Digard et al.,2020). This research can be subdivided into three categories addressing the following questions: ‘is there a cognitive benefit of multilingualism for autistic individuals?’, ‘what are the language outcomes for multilingual autistic individuals?’ and ‘what are the experiences of multilingual families who have an autistic child?’ (Gonzalez-Barrero & Nadig,2018,2019a,b; Hambly & Fombonne,2012; Hampton et al.,2017; Kremer-Sadlik,2005; Petersen et al.,2012; Reetzke et al.,2015; Valicenti-McDermott et al.,2013; Uljarevíc et al.,2016; Wang et al.,2018).Multilinguals code switch with varying frequency and show different cognitive costs of switching depending on to whom they are speaking (Dewaele & Li,2014; Blanco-Elorrieta & Pylkkänen,2018; Molnar et al.,2015; Rodriguez-Fornells et al.,2012). There is both a relationship with whether they perceive their interlocutor to be multilingual in the same language pairings and whether they are familiar with the interlocutor. In Molnar et al. (2015) findings, multilinguals make snap judgements about whether to switch depending on the multilingual status of the interlocutors. Multilinguals also prefer switching with familiar individuals, i.e. friends and family, rather than strangers (Dewaele & Li,2014; Rodriguez-Fornells et al.,2012). One study to directly measure code switching practices in autism was a case study (Yu,2016). Using conversational analysis, Yu showed that a highly verbal, Chinese English speaking autistic child could successfully switch between his languages with members of his family. Similar results were also obtained in recent work by Cohen et al. (2025), who examined code-switching practices in an English Spanish speaking family with an autistic child. Cohen et al. (2025)’s and Yu (2016)’s evidence shows that not only are autistic individuals capable of being proficient multilingual speakers, but that they are also able to switch between their languages in contextually appropriate ways.Yu’s (2016) and Cohen et al’s (2025) evidence also suggests that while language switching is present, there may be instances where it is qualitatively different between autistic and typical multilinguals. This is further supported by evidence from previous research that shows autistic multilinguals’ core language skills in their dominant language are no different than their monolingual counterparts (Hambly & Fombonne,2012). However, comparisons with monolingual language only provide parents and educators with the comfort of knowing that raising an autistic child multilingual is not detrimental (Uljarevíc et al.,2016). Research that specifically investigates multilingual communication in autism has wide implications for how typical and autistic multilinguals interact among each other and could foster an improved understanding of what sort of membership autistic multilinguals have within their linguistic community.Interestingly, Haesman and Gillepsie (2019a) found that there was a disparity between self-reported communication abilities and those reported by parents and/or relatives of autistic individuals. Autistic individuals tended to rate themselves as better with social-communication difficulties than their neurotypical relatives rate them to be. Autistic individuals also predicted that their relatives would rate their communication as poorer than they would rate themselves, because of how they perceived autistic people to behave and not fully based on the actual behaviour of the autistic individual (Haesman & Gillespie,2019b). Their prediction indeed matched how their relatives rated them; Haesman and Gillepsie (2019a) argued this demonstrated that there is a mismatch of perceived communication difficulties between autistic individuals and their typical family members. Haesman and Gillepsie (2019a)’s findings suggest that perceived communication difficulties associated with autism could be a barrier to multilingual language choices. For example, a parent might choose to use their languages’ differently with a typical child than an autistic child because of how they perceive an autistic individuals’ language abilities. This can be further exacerbated by erroneous assumptions that multilingualism could delay or hinder language development (Kremer-Sadlik,2005). Asking the autistic community about their language switching practices, without the prejudice of parent and/or external reporting, is therefore a critical part of understanding multilingualism in autism.To address the issues above, this research explores how autistic individuals self-report on their use and engagement with multiple languages. We define our research questions below:1.How do multilingual autistic adults self-report their multilingualism compared to multilingual non-autistic adults?2.In multilingual autistic adults who use two or more languages, how frequently do they choose to switch between languages when speaking to different interlocutors? Is this different when compared to multilingual non-autistic adults?3.What aspects of multilingualism might influence differences in choosing when to switch between different interlocutors? Are these different between autistic and non-autistic adults?4.How do self-reported language switching behaviours differ by social and environmental context between autistic and non-autistic adults?In the following sections we report survey data which investigated precisely the above.MethodsProcedureData was collected over two separate data collections. In both instances, the survey was made available on Qualtrics (2019 to 2020; 2021). Participants were recruited through the anonymous Qualtrics survey link via Cambridge Autism Research Centre Database, social media groups (i.e. Facebook, Twitter etc.) and word of mouth. The information sheet was presented on the first two pages of the survey and participants were given a link to download a hard PDF copy for their own records. After reading through the information sheet, participants had to click through the consent form items and agree to the terms of the study. If they did not agree, they were redirected away from the survey. Participants were then presented first with the demographic items, followed by questions on their language background and finally the Social-Responsiveness Questionnaire (SRS-2, Constantino,2013). In total, the survey took under thirty minutes to complete. Participants had to be aged 18 and over to complete the study. Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the University of Cambridge Psychological Research Ethics Committee and the Ethics Committee of the School of Arts and Humanities.SurveyDemographic QuestionsParticipants reported on their gender, age, country of residence, origin, ethnic status, employment status, educational status, and diagnosis information. With regards to clinical diagnosis, participants were asked to report whether they had received an official diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Conditions with the options being ’Yes’, ’No’ and ’Maybe’. For those who answered ’Yes’, they were asked to report from whom they received the diagnosis (i.e. Clinical Psychologist, Psychiatrist) etc. Those who answered ’No’ or ’Maybe’ were then followed up with a question asking them whether they suspected they had a diagnosis of an Autism Spectrum Condition, to which they could answer ’No’, ’Yes, but I have not received an official diagnosis’ or ’Yes and I am in the process of receiving a diagnosis’.Multilingual ProfilesThe first part of the survey asked participants to report on their multilingual background. Questions about multilingual backgrounds were adapted from previous multilingualism questionnaires (i.e. Anderson et al.,2018; Dewaele & Wei,2012,2013; Marian et al.,2007) to be suitable for use in a multilingual population and easily administered online.Participants were asked to name all the languages they knew (with a maximum of up to seven languages), in the order that they were acquired. For each given language, they were asked to give the year at which they began learning that language, the environment in which they learned that language, and whether they had ever lived in a country where this language was the majority language. Participants had to rate on a scale from 1 to 5 (Dewaele & Wei,2012) their proficiency in reading, writing, speaking and understanding each language.They were also asked to state whether they had stopped using this language and at which age they stopped using this language. Participants were asked to rate how frequently they used each language on a 6-point scale of every day to never, to gauge the extent to which participants used their languages frequently and on a daily basis. Language entropy values were computed for frequency scores (using the Language Entropy R Package, see Gullifer & Titone,2020for detailed description on how language entropy is computed) to get a representative value for the diversity of each multilingual individual’s environment. Finally, participants were asked to report whether they spoke a language that is not their native language at work and/or school and whether they used a language that is not their native language daily.Socio-Economic StatusTo create a measure of socio-economic status from the demographic information collected two measures were created, described as socio-economic status (educational) and socio-economic status (employment). The first used the information given by participants on their educational status, of which the options were bachelor’s degree, doctorate degree, foundation degree, high school graduate, diploma or the equivalent, master’s degree, postgraduate certificate, some high school but no diploma, some university but no degree, trade/technical/vocational training and other. To measure educational status, a binary categorical variable was created that identified participants as having either a graduate (doctorate, masters, post-graduate certificate, bachelors, foundation degree, some university but no degree) or non-graduate (high school graduate, diploma or the equivalent, some high school but no diploma, trade/technical/vocational training) level of education.For employment status participants could choose from the following options to describe their employment status: employed, self-employed, student, retired, unable to work, unemployed and not looking for work, unemployed and looking for work or other. From these seven options, a four-category variable which collated into employed/self-employed (4), student/retired/unemployed but not looking for work (3), unemployed and looking for work (2) and unable to work (1). Four respondents gave ‘other’ responses for employment status. The four other responses for employment, included one null (the participant did not provide further information), one ‘domestic engineer’ classified as an employment status in their home country, one self-employed, and one unable to work.Code-Switching ItemsThe code-switching items were designed to measure agreement with how easily and readily it is to switch between languages, whether multilinguals switched in certain given situations, and whether they switched in an aware manner. Participants were also asked to rate the frequency with which they switched with a number of different interlocutors, adapted from Dewaele and Li (2014). We also developed a new questionnaire, with some items adapted from Rodriquez-Fornell et al.’s (2012) BSWQ, to be able to encapsulate several multilingual background and language combinations. There was an also an attempt to measure a more detailed degree of language switching than was captured by the BSWQ by including 27 (instead of 12 items) and by adding situational layers (i.e. if participants are in a stressful situation, who they are speaking to, monolingual or multilingual friends, etc.) (see Supplementary Materials).Results: Demographic and Multilingual ProfilesParticipantsIn total, 364 (251 from the first survey and 113 from the second) survey responses (excluding 15 responses that were used during the piloting phase of the survey) of which 186 (135 from the first survey and 51 from the second survey) were identified as complete enough to be analysed. Of our groups, 107 participants reported a diagnosis (N= 98) or self-diagnosis of autism (N= 9) andN= 79 reported no diagnosis of autism. We removed theN= 9 who reported a self-diagnosis and only included theN= 98 who self-reported they had a diagnosis of autism, leaving us with a final sample ofN= 177. Complete responses were identified by whether (a) participants progressed past the consent form in the survey, (b) whether there were enough complete Social-Responsiveness-Scale (Constantino,2013) data and (c) whether there was enough complete data for our language-switching question items. In the instructions for how to answer the age of acquisition for each of the languages reported, participants were told to give the age of ‘0’ for their mother tongue/any language learnt from birth. Therefore, 12 participants who didn’t report at least one of their languages as being learnt from age 0 were also excluded. The survey had a number of questions that required written responses, including background information such as gender, that would have prevented bots or automated responses from completing the survey (Digard et al.,2020).Twenty duplicate entries were identified across both datasets individually, which were checked against date of birth and further demographic profile information. These duplicates were removed from the final dataset, retaining those with either the most complete information or the first recording of the duplicates’ data entry. To do so, date of births and demographic information for participants with duplicate birthdays were checked to confirm whether there were any duplicates. This is especially important given that the same databases and Facebook groups were used to recruit participants in both surveys. Following this manual check, six participants were removed from the dataset and six participants with duplicate birthdays were retained. For four of these participants there was not enough identifying information to confirm whether they were duplicates, i.e. they had the same country of birth/educational background, however they reported different languages in the survey and were therefore treated as different participants.Analysis PlanIn the first section of our results, we present the results from the language backgrounds of the autistic and non-autistic participants, such as how many languages they reported speaking, how frequently they used them, and whether they used their non-native language on a daily basis. Differences between the autistic and non-autistic participants are measured using either a Welch’s Sample t-test or Chi-Square test, were appropriate. In the second section, we subset our participant sample to only include those who were still using at least two languages and investigated whether there was a difference between autistic and non-autistic groups on how often they switched between languages with different interlocutors. We looked at whether the frequencies with which they switched between interlocutors were correlated with each other, to assess independence between these ratings, given that different interlocutors should ideally relate to different switching practices (i.e., I should switch less with monolingual friends than with friends who speak the same languages as me). We then investigated whether diagnosis, degree of multilingualism, non-native usage, and socio-economic status associated with frequency of switching for each interlocutor. In our third and final section, using the same sub-sample of active multilingual users, we investigated how participants reported their agreement on the questionnaire items we devised to measure multilingualism. First, we tested the reliability of the scale using factorial analysis and dropped any items that were found to be unreliable. We then evaluated whether there were differences between the autistic and non-autistic groups on their questionnaire scores from the total number of items deemed reliable, and then three sub-scales that were identified in factorial analysis. Finally, we also tested for associations with diagnosis, degree of multilingualism, non-native usage, and socio-economic status and code-switching practices, as measured by the questionnaire.Demographic InformationThere was no difference between autistic and non-autistic participants on their age (t(162.76) = −1.102, p-value =.27), as measured by a Welch Sample t-test, with the average age of autistic participants being 44.5 (sd = 13.4, minimum = 20.4, maximum = 79.1) and the non-autistic participants being 42.2 (sd = 14.2, minimum = 21, maximum = 92.9). There was also no difference in the distribution of gender (X2= 4.54, p-value =.10), with the majority (>60%) of participants female in both groups, although 5 (5%) people in the autistic group did not identify with either female or male labels, which was not the case for the non-autistic group. There was no significant difference in education (X2= 0.20, p-value =.78), as measured by a Pearson’sX2test, with a simulated p-value based on 2000 replicates (where a Pearson’sX2test is reported in this paper, the same formula is applied). There was a significant difference in country of birth (X2= 72.38, p-value =.001), where a higher proportion of autistic individuals were from the U.K. compared to non-autistic individuals who were from a wider range of countries, but none for country of residence (X2= 27.17, p-value = 0.10) or ethnicity (X2= 14.74, p-value =.15). There was a significant difference in employment status (X2= 12.86, p-value =.003), with a higher percentage of autistic participants reporting themselves as being unable to work or unemployed and looking for work (20% compared to 4% in the non-autistic group). As expected, there was a significant difference in total raw SRS scores, with the ASC group (mean = 106, sd = 29.7) scoring higher than the non-autistic group (mean = 41.3, sd = 23.2) (t(174.82) = −16.33, p-value < 2.2e-16). Overall, the majority of our participants were female, from English speaking countries, of white ethnicity, employed or self-employed and held graduate-level educations. Further demographic details on the participants are reported in the Supplementary Materials accompanying this paper.Participants were also asked, regardless of whether they reported having autism, to report whether they had any additional diagnoses of a learning condition, such as dyslexia, ADD/ADHD, dyspraxia, dyscalculia etc. As for the question on autism, participants were asked whether these conditions were self-diagnosed or not. In our non-autistic sample, 3 participants reported additional diagnoses and in our autistic sample, 30 participants had additional diagnoses.Multilingual Language ProfilesParticipants provided information on their language background, including the languages they reported knowing, the age at which they had acquired or first learnt each language, the environment in which they had acquired each language, whether they still used this language on a weekly or daily basis, and the age at which they stopped using this language on a weekly or daily basis.The majority of participants in the non-autistic groups reported speaking 2–4 languages and in the autistic group the spread was 2–5 languages. A Pearson’sX2test showed there was a significant difference between the autistic and non-autistic group (X2= 25, p-value = 0.001), where a higher proportion of autistic individuals reported speaking more than 3 languages, compared to a minority of non-autistic participants. While there was a wide spread of languages in the surveyed participants, 176 participants reported knowing or speaking English. One participant did not report English as one of their languages, even though they reported being born and currently living in the U.K., and were still included in the analysis, despite it being clear they had not included English as one of their languages even though it most likely was. Overall, participants self-reported high levels of total proficiency. There were non-significant differences between the autistic and non-autistic group for the first (t(165) = −0.06, p-value =.5), second languages (t(160) = 0.44, p-value =.7) and third languages (t(107) = −0.05, p-value = 1) (Table1). Differences in the subsequent languages are not reported due to the autistic group being overwhelmingly larger.Table 1 Overall proficiency scores across languages reported in this study in the autistic and non-autistic groupsFull size tableMultilingual Language UsageTo gather information on participant’s daily multilingual environment, participants reported how frequently they used their languages on a daily basis and whether they had stopped using any of the languages they reported knowing, including the age at which they stopped using those languages. A new variable was created for the number of languages known based on the languages participants actually reported using. There was a significant difference in entropy, as measured by a Welch Two Sample t-test, between the autistic (mean = 1.61, sd = 0.58, min = 0.65, max = 2.70) and non-autistic group (mean = 1.30, sd = 0.49, min = 0, max = 2.62), with the autistic group having on average higher language entropy values (t(175) = −3.9, p-value =.0002). Frequency values are shown in Fig.1.Fig. 1Bar graph showing the number of languages used in the autistic (ASC) and non-autistic (non-ASC) groups and the degree of frequency for each of the languages reported (including those reported as not currently in use)Full size imageIn both groups, the majority of participants reported having lived in a country where their first language (> 90%;Χ2= 0.73, p-value = 0.5) and second language (> 60%;Χ2= 4.8, p-value=0.07) were the majority language. In the autistic group, the majority reported using their native language at work or school (58%,N= 57), whereas in the non-autistic group the majority used their non-native language at work/school (55%,N= 43); although this was not significantly different (X2= 3.1, p-value =.1). The majority of autistic participants reported using their native language on a daily basis (70%,N= 69) and, whereas this was evenly split in the non-autistic group (51%,N= 40), the difference between the spread in these groups was significantly different (X2= 7.2, p-value =.009).Results: Language Switching & UsageFor the next set of analysis, which required participants to respond about how they switched between their languages, the variable referring to participants’ actual number of languages still in use was used to exclude those participants who reported still using only one language. For this analysis, the dataset was reduced from 177 participants to 132, of which 58 were non-autistic and 74 had a self-reported diagnosis of autism. To note, four of the participants who were excluded on the basis of still only using one language were no longer using their reported first language. All of the 132 participants who were included in this analysis were still using their reported first language.Interlocutor ChoicesThere were no significant differences, as measured by a Welch Two Sample T-test, between the code-switching frequency in the autistic and non-autistic groups with friends who were bilingual but not the same language combination of participants (mean autistic group = 1.97, mean non-autistic group = 1.91; t(123) = .29, p-value =.8, corrected p-value =.77), bilingual friends who spoke the same language combination as participants (mean autistic group = 3.41, mean non-autistic group = 3.47; t(124) = 0.29, p-value =.8, corrected p-value =.77), monolingual friends (mean autistic group = 1.74, mean non-autistic group = 1.83; t(118) = 0.43, p-value =.7, corrected p-value =.77), strangers of whom their spoken languages were known (mean autistic group = 2.84, mean non-autistic group = 2.95; t(122) =.6, p-value =.5, corrected p-value =.77). There was a significant between-group difference (p-value < 0.05) in code-switching frequency with strangers for whom participants did not know which language the strangers spoke (mean autistic group = 1.73, mean non-autistic group = 1.34; t(129) = −2.7, p-value =.01, corrected p-value =.04), for which autistic participants reported code-switching more frequently than non-autistic participants. We corrected p-values for the number of comparisons (N= 5) using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction.A Pearson’s correlation was used to investigate the degree of correlation between the individual interlocutor items (Table2). This was done to better understand if the frequencies with which participants switched with different interlocutors were related to each other. Overall, there were mostly significantly positive relationships, such as between the frequency with which participants choose to switch with strangers for whom they did know which languages they spoke and all other interlocutors. Comparatively, in the autistic group, there was a significant relationship with bilingual friends/family who spoke the same language and language switching with monolingual friends, which was not identified in the non-autistic groups. A Fisher’s exact test of comparison of each Pearson coefficient identified a significant difference for the relationship between bilingual friends who speak different languages and monolinguals, with the autistic demonstrating a stronger positive relationship compared to the non-autistic group (p= 0.001).Table 2 Correlation coefficients between interlocutor items to evaluate the strength of relationship between the 5 interlocutor items within the combined group of autistic and non-autistic participants (n= 132), autistic group only (n= 74) and non-autistic group only (n= 58)Full size tableAssociations with Responses to Interlocutor ItemsTo better understand which profile variables influenced participants’ interlocutor switching choices, five ordinal logistic regression models were run on each interlocutor item with five independent variables. These included diagnosis label (autism or not-autism diagnosed), degree of multilingualism (which was the first principal component explaining 79% of the variance in the variables measuring total multilingual proficiency, number of languages in use, and degree of language usage, i.e., language entropy), degree of non-native language use (which was the first principal component explaining 82% of the variance in the variables measuring non-native language usage at work/school and on a daily basis), and, finally, education and employment status. The decision to use the dimensionally reduced variables was to reduce the risk of overfitting the model with too many independent variables that were strongly related with each other. The model below summarizes the regression equation for the dimensionally reduced variables:Language Switching with Interlocutort=α+β1Diagnosis Groupt.+β2Multilingualism Dimensiont.+β3Non-native Usage Dimensiont.+β4Employment.Statust.+β5Educational.Statust.The only model that was significant against the null (p-value =.02) was the model for language switching with strangers, even if those strangers’ languages weren’t known to the participants (AIC = 260.03, log likelihood = −121.02;β1=0.54, 95%CI[−0.27, 1.36], OR = 1.71,β2= 0.28, 95%[0.04, 0.52], OR = 1.32,β3= −0.02, 95%[−0.31, 0.28], OR = 0.98,β4= −0.20, 95%[−0.59, 0.20], OR = 0.82,β5= −0.52, 95%[−1.75, 0.80], OR = 0.59), where more multilingualism was positively associated with more switching behaviours. Results from the other four, non-significant models are reported in the Supplementary materials accompanying this paper.Situational Code-SwitchingTable3shows below the distribution of responses for how participants choose to use their languages under different conditions. A Chi-square analysis showed only a significant difference between the autistic and non-autistic group for situations in which they always choose to switch between languages (Χ2= 6.3, p-value =.02). In this difference, non-autistic participants (78%) reported more than autistic participants (57%) having situations in which they always switched between languages.Table 3 Distribution of responses to whether autistic and non-autistic participants switched or used only one language in different contextsFull size tableLanguage Switching ItemsCode-switching behaviour was measured via our questionnaire items don a scale of 1 to 5, with more dense, spontaneous, and less controlled code-switching equating to a higher score on the scale. Total scores for the scale ranged from 27 to 135, which were then corrected to 16–80 after validating the scales items.To validate our measure, Alpha’s Cronbach was calculated across both groups, which returned a value of 0.76 (95%CI [0.71–0.82]). Overall, the alpha value showed good inter-relatedness between the questionnaire items (Cortina,1993). Evaluating the individual output per item, showed that dropping items 2, 5, 16, 22, and 24 would improve the scale’s reliability. Alpha’s Cronbach on the scale with the above 5 items removed showed a very good internal validity of 0.82 (95%CI[0.77–0.86]), which was an improvement from the first alpha of 0.76 and therefore suggests that dropping these five items improved the questionnaire’s reliability. Removing these items changed the scale’s total scoring 27 to 135, to 22 to 110. A Maximum Likelihood Factor Analysis with varimax rotation was then used to identify whether the constructs hypothesized in the methods were loading onto the scale as predicted. In order to meet the power required for factorial analysis, only the combined group was measured (Osborne & Fitzpatrick,2012). The ratio of cases to variable in this analysis was 132:22 (6). The analysis showed that three factors explained 44% of the variance, with the first factor contributing 20%, the second 15% and the third 10%. All the items on the scale had loadings of over 0.5, except for items 6, 7, 18, 21, 25, and 27. These were finally removed from the scale, and the same factor analysis was performed on the remaining 16 items (with cases to variable ratio now 132:16 (8.25). The new analysis showed that the three factors identified in the final 16 questionnaire items explained 53% of the cumulative variance. Factor 1 included items 4 (loading = 0.76), 9 (loading = 0.67), 11 (loading = 0.83), 13 (loading = 0.84), 19 (loading = 0.66), 23 (loading = 0.75) and 26 (loading = 0.52). Factor 2 included items 3 (loading = 0.60), 8 (loading = 0.69), 12 (loading = 0.81), 14 (loading = 0.62), 15 (loading = 0.59), and 17 (loading = 0.77). Factor 3 included items 1 (loading = 0.56), 10 (loading = 0.83) and 20 (loading = 0.49). Factor 1 explained 24% of the cumulative variance, Factor 2 explained 18% and Factor 3 11%. Finally, there were no significant differences on total scale scores obtained from the 16 retained questionnaire items between the autistic (mean = 51.3, sd = 12.6) and non-autistic group (mean = 51.3, sd = 8.01) (t(125) = 1.1, p-value =.3), as measured by a Welch Two Sample t-test.However, there were significant differences between the groups on scores for the subsample of items that loaded onto factor 1 (t(127) = 3.6, p-value =.0004), with the autistic group (mean = 24.3, sd = 7.59) scoring significantly lower than the non-autistic group (mean = 28.4, sd = 5.11). There were no significant differences between the scores obtained from the items that loaded onto factor 2 (t(130) = −2, p-value =.05) and factor 3 (t(130) = 0.15, p-value =.9). Further details on the items that loaded onto each factor can be found in the Supplementary materials of this paper, however it is important to note that items which loaded onto the first factor related solely to how effortful participants rated switching between languages. We report these items below, with items marked with an asterisk being items that were reverse coded, meaning that a high score obtained in these items meant a participant overall rated switching between languages as easy.I can rapidly switch between my languages during a single conversation with another bilingual person.If I’m interrupted by someone speaking one language whilst I’m speaking another language to someone else, I find it difficult to switch between the two languages. *.If I’m in a mixed group of bilingual and monolingual speakers, I find it easy to switch between using different languages.I find it easy and not demanding at all to switch between two or more languages within single conversation.When speaking to another bilingual person, I find it difficult to rapidly switch between my languages within a single sentence. *.I find it takes a lot of effort to switch between two or more languages within single sentence. *.I find it difficult to use one of my other languages if I’ve been speaking in one language only for a significant period of time. *.Associations with Language Switching BehaviourFinally, to identify which demographic and multilingual variables contributed to differences in the total scores on the code-switching items and for each of the three factors identified, we used four additive multilinear models with the same five independent variables as in the models for interlocutor switching. The model below summarizes the regression equation for the dimensionally reduced variables:Language Switching Behaviourt=α+β1Diagnosis Groupt.+β2Multilingualism Dimensiont.+β3Non-native Usage Dimensiont.+β4Employment.Statust.+β5Educational.Statust.The residuals from these models were not normally distributed and therefore a Gaussian multilinear regression model was used instead. The regression model was not significant for total scores (GCV(127) = 0.06, adj.R2= 0.00;β1=−0.03, 95%CI[−0.12, 0.05],β2= −0.004, 95%[−0.03, 0.02],β3= 0.03, 95%[−0.00, 0.06],β4= −0.01, 95%[−0.06, 0.03],β5= 0.02, 95%[−0.13, 0.16]) and for the third factor (GCV(127) = 0.14, adj.R2= −0.04;β1=−0.003, 95%CI[−0.13, 0.13],β2= −0.01, 95%[−0.05, 0.03],β3= 0.01, 95%[−0.04, 0.05],β4= −0.02, 95%[−0.08, 0.05],β5= −0.02, 95%[−0.23, 0.19]). Instead, we found significant associations with diagnosis (p-value = 0.001) and multilingualism (p-value = 0.04) for the first factor (GCV(127) = 0.09, adj.R2= 0.13;β1=−0.17, 95%CI[−0.27, −0.07],β2= 0.03, 95%[0.002, 0.07],β3= 0.03, 95%[−0.002, 0.07],β4= −0.004, 95%[−0.06, 0.05],β5= 0.10, 95%[−0.07, 0.26]) and with diagnosis (p-value = 0.021) and multilingualism (p-value = 0.015) for the second factor (GCV(127) = 0.21, adj.R2= 0.06;β1=0.20, 95%CI[0.03, 0.36],β2= −0.07, 95%[−0.12, −0.01],β3= 0.04, 95%[−0.02, 0.10],β4= −0.013, 95%[−0.10, 0.07],β5= −0.06, 95%[−0.33, 0.21]).Differences Between Individual Responses on Language SwitchingFinally, we examined whether there were any group differences between the autistic and non-autistic groups on individual items of the language switching questions. A Welch Two Sample t-test was used to test differences on responses to each of the 16 validated items between the autistic and non-autistic group (see Supplementary material). After applying an FDR correction to the p-values for number of comparisons (N= 16), we identified 6 items (4, 11, 13, 15, 19, and 23) for which autistic individuals gave a statistically different response to their non-autistic counterparts. The items and their statistical difference are summarized in Table4below.Table 4 The 6 items for which autistic and non-autistic individuals scored significantly differently and the subsequent results of the t-test analysisFull size tableDiscussionThe results from this study showed that autistic participants in our survey rated themselves as more multilingual, in number of languages spoken and in language entropy scores, than non-autistic participants. In line with Digard et al. (2020), many of our autistic participants reported knowing 3 or more languages. In comparison with the autistic group who mostly reported less than three, autistic participants were also highly proficient in at least their first three languages. Autistic participants also rated themselves as being more balanced users in their multiple languages than non-autistic participants, as measured by their significantly higher language entropy values. They also engaged in a high amount of code-switching under different circumstances, however having a diagnosis of autism was associated with finding language switching more effortful and switching between languages in a less ‘controlled’ manner, such as using words from other languages even when speaking to monolingual people.Previous findings in multilingualism and autism have found that autistic and autistic-like people show a special interest in learning languages, sometimes even regardless of communicative intent (Baron-Cohen & Wheelwright,1999; Caldwell-Harris,2022; Kissine et al.,2019; Smith & Tsimpli,1995,1996; Smith et al.,2010; Tsimpli & Smith,1998). However, using information, such as frequency of daily usage and whether a person used a non-native language in their daily life, meant the sample of participants included in this study would have mostly been those who needed and/or used their languages regularly in their daily life. We also asked participants to report whether they had stopped using a given language and at what age they had stopped using that language. For adults this is especially critical as the older they are, the further away they may be from languages used and/or learnt in school. This assumption is supported by our findings that the mean age at which participants stopped using a reported ‘non-native’ language was about 20 years of age, around the time an adult may be leaving full time education and moving away from their family home. Given that the purpose of this study was to examine current language usage, it seemed important to be able to identify the currently active language profile of participants in the study. Asking participants about which languages they had stopped using did indeed show that a small portion of participants were actively monolingual, further supported by the number of participants who only used one language. Furthermore, re-filtering participants through the number of languages in active use managed to match the spread of multilingualism in the autistic and non-autistic samples by reducing the number of self-rated tri- and quadri-linguals in the autistic group. We highlight this evidence from our study to stress the importance of including a question about when participants stopped using their ‘other’ languages in research on adult multilinguals.Another key incidental finding from this research was that an equally high proportion of autistic to non-autistic participants reported having lived in a country where at least their first or second language was spoken. Whilst there has been previous research on the effects of living abroad or cross-cultural living on personality and creativity (Kauffmann & Kuh,1984; Maddux & Galinsky,2009; Tadmor et al.,2012), there is still a significant lack of literature on the relationship between living abroad and autism. Research that has focussed on autistic individuals living abroad has, as with early studies on multilingualism and autism, focused on intervention practices, prevalence rates and familial, immigrant experiences for families of autistic children (Barnevik-Olsson et al.,2008; de Leeuw, Happé, & Hoekstra, (2020); Hussein et al.,2019). Although beyond the scope of this study, the impact of living abroad for autistic individuals and their subsequent experiences still represents a large gap in the research literature. This gap may possibly exist due to preconceived notions of instances on sameness and low tolerance of ambiguity that potentially ignore autistic adults who choose to live and work in a country that is not their country of origin.Indeed, this is further evidenced in the rates of autistic individuals who, in our study, reported using a non-native language at work/school or on a daily basis. Even though more non-autistic participants used a non-native language than autistic participants and the majority of autistic participants were using their native tongue, many autistic individuals were using a non-native language daily and using a non-native language at work or school. As the majority of research in bilingual or multilingual autistic individuals is still focussed on children, it is easy to miss the importance of measuring adults’ linguistic and migration choices, outside the confines of family and educational settings. Again, as previously highlighted in Digard et al. (2020)’s work, these results further speak to the need to reevaluate the degree to which autistic individuals are perceived to be monolingual and/or monocultural individuals.We also found no differences in the average rate of switching languages with different interlocutors between autistic and non-autistic individuals. The only difference that emerged was on self-reported language switching with strangers, where participants did not know the languages spoken by a given stranger. In this instance, autistic participants reported a higher frequency of switching behaviours than non-autistic participants. Interestingly, our questionnaire also identified that autistic participants rated finding code-switching more effortful than non-autistic participants on the sub-scale of items related to language switching effortfulness. We also found significant associations with diagnosis and degree of multilingualism with self-reported language switching effort and control. Within the individual items that were deemed reliable, there were also individual differences in the average agreeability rating. When asked about the ability to rapidly switch between languages during conversation, autistic participants gave significantly lower agreement ratings than non-autistic participants. The same was the case for whether it was easy to switch between two or more languages in conversation. Therefore, this could suggest that autistic individuals find switching between languages in conversation more effortful than non-autistic individuals, despite being equally as frequent and habitual in their language switching practices. The same was found for the ease of switching between languages within a single sentence, where autistic individuals showed more agreement that this was difficult than non-autistic individuals. This finding is supported by our item on language switching awareness, where autistic people reported being less aware they were using words from one language when speaking to another. Cognitive effortfulness and a lack of awareness of language switching may also explain why more autistic than non-autistic participants reported higher frequency of switching between languages with strangers whose languages aren’t known. Overall, our results would suggest that for autistic people switching between languages may be more cognitively effortful than for non-autistic multilinguals. Further research should consider exploring the relationship between social-communication, executive functions, and language switching in autistic individuals to better understand why autistic multilinguals might find switching more difficult than non-autistic multilinguals.LimitationsThe present study was mostly limited by being a self-report measurement of language switching practices and choices, although some research on comparing self-reported and oral production of code-switching has found positive correlations between the two (Cox et al.,2020). However, without naturalistic corpora of language switching in autistic adults, it is impossible to compare how self-reported choices in switching may represent real-life usage. Furthermore, our measures did not differentiate between autistic and non-autistic interlocutors when asking participants to rate the frequency with which they switched languages when speaking to different interlocutors. As discussed in the introduction of this research, there has been evidence to suggest that autistic-to-autistic interactions are different to autistic to typical interactions (Haesman & Gillespie,2019a,b). Therefore, how participants rated their frequency of language switching may have changed, if they were asked to rate on autistic and non-autistic interlocutors comparatively.The sample collected, although large initially, also contained many duplicate entries. This may have been an effect of advertising the surveys on the same databases and social media groups and keeping it active for so long. However, the biggest reduction in sample size came from removing individuals in the study who were non-active multilinguals. In future research of this kind, if daily usage of multiple languages is a critical factor, it should be important to consider whether multilingual self-reporting adults are still actively multilingual.Finally, a large proportion of women participated in the study, regardless of diagnosis. This is consistent with previous findings from surveys conducted on multilingualism where women represented the largest segment of respondents (Dewaele & Wei,2012; Wilson & Dewaele,2010; Digard et al.,2020). Wilson and Dewaele (2010) argue that this could be a phenomenon of women being more represented in foreign language professions. They also speculate that high percentages of women taking part in survey research may simply mean that women may be more willing to take part in survey research than men. Therefore, it is likely the over-representation of women in this study is driven by the same factors, regardless of whether a person has a diagnosis of autism or not. However, this also means that the results of this study may be biased against representing the majority of the autistic multilingual experience, where men are known to outnumber women 2–3 to 1 in receiving an autism diagnosis (Lai et al.,2017). We also had an overrepresentation of white, graduate-level, employed individuals suggesting that our results may not have been as inclusive as possible to different multilingual experiences, especially those experienced by non-white, minority, and/or immigrant communities. As online data collection becomes increasingly popular, future research in multilingualism and autism should be proactive in making sure autistic multilingual men and that ethnically and socially diverse communities are proportionally represented.ConclusionThe findings from this study show that, as also reported in previous work (Digard et al.,2020), autistic individuals are active and engaged users of multiple languages. Going beyond what has been reported to date, this study demonstrates ways in which autistic participants engage with and use their multiple languages. Not only are they comparably multilingual to non-autistic individuals, and in some cases even more so, but they are also frequent code-switchers. Nevertheless, it is important to note in some contexts, autistic participants reported more difficulty with language switching than their non-autistic counterparts. Overall, the findings from this research suggest the need for further research to better understand the extent to which the naturalistic switching practices of autistic individuals are similar or dissimilar to non-autistic individuals.Data AvailabilityNot all participants consented to having the data from this study made publicly available and therefore data from this study is only available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. However, the R markdown containing the output of our final analysis, including supplementary results not reported in the main manuscript of the paper, can be found here:https://github.com/sarahkaarina/language-switching-autism.ReferencesAnderson, J. A., Mak, L., Chahi, K., & Bialystok, E. (2018). The language and social background questionnaire: Assessing degree of bilingualism in a diverse population.Behavior Research Methods,50(1), 250–263.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBarnevik-Olsson, M., Gillberg, C., & Fernell, E. (2008). Prevalence of autism in children born to Somali parents living in sweden: A brief report.Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology,50(8), 598–601.ArticleGoogle ScholarBaron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (1999). Obsessions’ in children with autism or Asperger syndrome: Content analysis in terms of core domains of cognition.The British Journal of Psychiatry,175(5), 484–490.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarBlanco-Elorrieta, E., & Pylkkänen, L. (2018). Ecological validity in bilingualism research and the bilingual advantage.Trends in Cognitive Sciences,22(12), 1117–1126.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarCaldwell-Harris, C. L. (2022). Passionate about Languages, but listening and speaking–¡ ay, caramba! Autistic adults discuss foreign Language learning.Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development.https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2022.2029869ArticleGoogle ScholarCohen, S. R., Guerra, A. W., Miguel, J., Bottema-Beutel, K., & Oliveira, G. (2025). Hablando at home: Examining the interactional resources of a bilingual autistic child.Journal of Child Language,52(1), 135–157.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarConstantino, J. N. (2013). Social responsiveness scale.Encyclopedia of autism spectrum disorders(pp. 2919–2929). Springer.ChapterGoogle ScholarCortina, J. M. (1993). What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and applications.Journal Of Applied Psychology,78(1), 98.ArticleGoogle ScholarCox, J. G., LaBoda, A., & Mendes, N. (2020). I’m gonna spanglish it on you: Self-reported vs. oral production of Spanish–English codeswitching.Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,23(2), 446–458.ArticleGoogle Scholarde Leeuw, A., Happ´e, F., & Hoekstra, R. A. (2020). A conceptual framework for understanding the cultural and contextual factors on autism across the globe.Autism Research,13(7), 1029–1050.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDewaele, J. M., & Li, W. (2014). Intra- and inter-individual variation in self-reported codeswitching patterns of adult multilinguals.International Journal of Multilingualism,11(2), 225–246.ArticleGoogle ScholarDewaele, J. M., & Wei, L. (2012). Multilingualism, empathy and multicompetence.International Journal of Multilingualism,9(4), 352–366.ArticleGoogle ScholarDewaele, J. M., & Wei, L. (2013). Is multilingualism linked to a higher tolerance of ambiguity?Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,16(1), 231–240.ArticleGoogle ScholarDigard, B. G., Sorace, A., Stanfield, A., & Fletcher-Watson, S. (2020). Bilingualism in autism: Language learning profiles and social experiences.Autism,24(8), 2166–2177.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarFriedman, L., & Sterling, A. (2019). A review of language, executive function, and intervention in autism spectrum disorder.Seminars in speech and language(Vol. 04, pp. 291–304). Thieme Medical.Google ScholarGonzalez-Barrero, A. M., & Nadig, A. (2018). Bilingual children with autism spectrum disorders: The impact of amount of language exposure on vocabulary and morphological skills at school age.Autism Research,11(12), 1667–1678.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGonzalez-Barrero, A. M., & Nadig, A. (2019a). Brief report: Vocabulary and grammatical skills of bilingual children with autism spectrum disorders at school age.Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,49(9), 3888–3897.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGonzalez-Barrero, A. M., & Nadig, A. S. (2019b). Can bilingualism mitigate set-shifting difficulties in children with autism spectrum disorders?Child Development,90(4), 1043–1060.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGullifer, J. W., & Titone, D. (2020). Characterizing the social diversity of bilingualism using language entropy.Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,23(2), 283–294.ArticleGoogle ScholarHaesman, B., & Gillespie, A. (2019a). Learning how to read autistic behavior from interactions between autistic people.Behavioral and Brain Sciences,42(93).Haesman, B., & Gillespie, A. (2019b). Neurodivergent intersubjectivity: Distinctive features of how autistic people create shared understanding.Autism,23(4), 910–921.ArticleGoogle ScholarHambly, C., & Fombonne, E. (2012). The impact of bilingual environments on language development in children with autism spectrum disorders.Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,42(7), 1342–1352.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarHampton, S., Rabagliati, H., Sorace, A., & Fletcher-Watson, S. (2017). Autism and bilingualism: A qualitative interview study of parents’ perspectives and experiences.Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,60(2), 435–446.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarHussein, A. M., Pellicano, E., & Crane, L. (2019). Understanding and awareness of autism among Somali parents living in the United Kingdom.Autism,23(6), 1408–1418.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarKauffmann, N. L., & Kuh, G. D. (1984). The impact of study abroad on personal development of college students. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (68th, New Orleans, LA, April 23–27).Kissine, M., Luffin, X., Aiad, F., Bourourou, R., Deliens, G., & Gaddour, N. (2019). Noncolloquial arabic in Tunisian children with autism spectrum disorder: A possible instance of language acquisition in a noninteractive context.Language Learning,69(1), 44–70.ArticleGoogle ScholarKremer-Sadlik, T. (2005). To be or not to be bilingual: Autistic children from multilingual families. InProceedings of the 4th international symposium on bilingualism(pp. 1225– 1234).Lai, M. C., Lombardo, M. V., Ruigrok, A. N., Chakrabarti, B., Auyeung, B., Szatmari, P., & Consortium, M. A. (2017). Quantifying and exploring camouflaging in men and women with autism.Autism,21(6), 690–702.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMaddux, W. W., & Galinsky, A. D. (2009). Cultural borders and mental barriers: The relationship between living abroad and creativity.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,96(5), 1047.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMarian, V., Blumenfeld, H. K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007). The language experience and proficiency questionnaire (leap-q): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and multilinguals.Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,50(4), 940–967.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMolnar, M., Ibáñez-Molina, A., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Interlocutor identity affects language activation in bilinguals.Journal of Memory and Language,81, 91–104.ArticleGoogle ScholarOsborne, J. W., & Fitzpatrick, D. C. (2012). Replication analysis in exploratory factor analysis: What it is and why it makes your analysis better.Practical Assessment Research and Evaluation,17(1), 15.Google ScholarPetersen, J. M., Marinova-Todd, S. H., & Mirenda, P. (2012). Brief report: An exploratory study of lexical skills in bilingual children with autism spectrum disorder.Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,42(7), 1499–1503.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarReetzke, R., Zou, X., Sheng, L., & Katsos, N. (2015). Communicative development in bilingually exposed Chinese children with autism spectrum disorders.Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,58(3), 813–825.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarRodriguez-Fornells, A., Kramer, U., Lorenzo-Seva, U., Festman, J., & Münte, T. . F. . (2012). Self-assessment of individual differences in language switching. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 338.ArticleGoogle ScholarSmith, N., & Tsimpli, I. (1995). The mind of a savant: language learning and modularity. oxford: Blackwell.Smith, N., & Tsimpli, I. M. (1996). Modules and quasi-modules: Language and theory of mind in a polyglot savant.University College London Working Papers in Linguistics,8, 1–17.Google ScholarSmith, N., Tsimpli, I., Morgan, G., & Woll, B. (2010).The signs of a savant: Language against the odds. Cambridge University Press.BookGoogle ScholarTadmor, C. T., Galinsky, A. D., & Maddux, W. W. (2012). Getting the most out of living lang="EN-GB"abroad: Biculturalism and integrative complexity as key drivers of creative and professional success.Journal of personality and social psychology,103(3), 520.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarTsimpli, I. M., & Smith, N. (1998). Modules and quasi-modules: Language and theory of mind in a polyglot savant.Learning and Individual Differences,10(3), 193–215.ArticleGoogle ScholarUljarevíc, M., Katsos, N., Hudry, K., & Gibson, J. L. (2016). Practitioner review: Multilingualism and neurodevelopmental disorders–an overview of recent research and discussion of clinical implications.Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,57(11), 1205–1217.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarValicenti-McDermott, M., Tarshis, N., Schouls, M., Galdston, M., Hottinger, K., Seijo, R., & Shinnar, S. (2013). Language differences between monolingual English and bilingual English-Spanish young children with autism spectrum disorders.Journal of Child Neurology,28(7), 945–948.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarWang, M., Jegathesan, T., Young, E., Huber, J., & Minhas, R. (2018). Raising children with autism spectrum disorders in monolingual vs bilingual homes: A scoping review.Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics,39(5), 434–446.ArticleGoogle ScholarWilson, R., & Dewaele, J. M. (2010). The use of web questionnaires in second language acquisition and bilingualism research.Second Language Research,26(1), 103–123.ArticleGoogle ScholarYu, B. (2016). Code-switching as a communicative resource within routine, bilingual family interactions for a child on the autism spectrum.Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups,1(14), 17–28.ArticleGoogle ScholarDownload referencesFundingFor this research, SK-C received funding from Arts and Humanities Research Council Doctoral Training Program (DTP) studentship and Trinity College, University of Cambridge. Any views expressed in this work are by the authors and are not necessarily those of the funders.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKSarah K. CrockfordTheoretical and Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Modern and Medieval Languages, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKSarah K. Crockford & Napoleon KatsosFaculty of Education, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UKSarah K. Crockford & Jenny L. GibsonAuthorsSarah K. CrockfordView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarJenny L. GibsonView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarNapoleon KatsosView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsSK-C developed the research idea, designed the survey, oversaw data collection, analyzed the data, and wrote the final manuscript. JL-G and NK supervised the research, contributed to the survey design, and helped in the writing of the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence toSarah K. Crockford.Ethics declarationsCompeting InterestsThe authors declare no competing interests.Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationBelow is the link to the electronic supplementary material.Supplementary Material 1Rights and permissionsOpen AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleCrockford, S.K., Gibson, J.L. & Katsos, N. Surveying the Language Switching Behaviours of Multilingual Autistic and Non-Autistic Adults.J Autism Dev Disord(2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-025-07078-2Download citationReceived:13 March 2025Accepted:19 September 2025Published:18 October 2025DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-025-07078-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy shareable link to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeKeywordsAutismMultilingualismCode-switchingUse our pre-submission checklistAvoid common mistakes on your manuscript.Advertisement Should Parents Only Use One Language with Their Autistic Children? The Relations Between Multilingualism, Children‘s Social Skills, and Parent-Child CommunicationArticleOpen access29 May 2024 Providing Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Language Assessment Services for Multilingual Children with Developmental Language Disorder: a Scoping ReviewArticle09 November 2022 Culturally and Linguistically Responsive Autism Identification Among Multilingual YouthChapter© 2025

---
*This content was automatically scraped by Webscraping Agent A*
