# Safety and Efficacy of Ecopipam in Patients with Tourette Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

**DOI:** 10.1007/s40263-024-01140-w
**Journal:** CNS drugs
**Date:** 2024-12-28
**Authors:** ['Prateek KumarPanda', 'PragnyaPanda', 'LesaDawman', 'Anand SantoshMishra', 'VinodKumar', 'Indar KumarSharawat']
**Category:** tourette_syndrome
**Source:** pubmed
**Scraped by:** agent_a
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T10:52:20.831321
**Source URL:** https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-024-01140-w

## Abstract

Ecopipam is a selective antagonist of the dopamine D1 receptor, and its efficacy and safety have recently been explored in several clinical trials involving patients with Tourette syndrome (TS). The objectives of this systematic review were to determine the pooled estimate for efficacy [in terms of reduction in tic Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS) scores] and safety of oral ecopipam in subjects with TS.
All clinical trials that explored the efficacy and/or safety of ecopipam in patients with TS were included to determine the pooled estimate for change in YGTSS, Clinical Global Impression (CGI)-TS, and the severity of comorbid attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), obsessive compulsion disorder (OCD), and depressive symptoms, as well as the nature and frequency of adverse effects. Case-series, retrospective studies, and case reports were excluded. Databases, such as PUBMED, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and SCOPUS were searched to identify these trials using suitable combination of MESH terms/keywords on 15 June 2024. ROB 2.0 and ROBINS-I tool were used to assess the risk of bias in included randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized intervention studies, respectively, and the GRADE system to determine the certainty of the collated evidence.
A total of 96 records were identified in the database search and 31 records were screened after removing duplicates. After excluding 23 irrelevant records, the full-text review included 8 records. Finally, six publications from three completed clinical trials (two RCTs, with one having an open-label extension) and one ongoing clinical trial were included. A total of 251 participants were included. The pooled estimate for mean change in YGTSS-TTS from baseline to the completion of the randomization period was statistically better in the ecopipam group compared with the placebo group [mean difference: - 3.0, 95% (confidence interval (CI) - 4.2 to - 1.9, I
Ecopipam is effective in reducing the severity of tics in subjects with TS and has a good safety profile. However, only a limited number of studies were included in the review, with some having small sample sizes and short duration of follow-up.

## Full Text Content

HomeCNS DrugsArticleSafety and Efficacy of Ecopipam in Patients with Tourette Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysisSystematic ReviewPublished:27 December 2024Volume 39, pages 127–142, (2025)Cite this articleCNS DrugsAims and scopeSubmit manuscriptPrateek Kumar Panda1na1,Pragnya Panda2na1,Lesa Dawman3na1,Anand Santosh Mishra1,Vinod Kumar4&…Indar Kumar SharawatORCID:orcid.org/0000-0002-7003-72181Show authors741Accesses1AltmetricExplore all metricsAbstractBackground and ObjectivesEcopipam is a selective antagonist of the dopamine D1 receptor, and its efficacy and safety have recently been explored in several clinical trials involving patients with Tourette syndrome (TS). The objectives of this systematic review were to determine the pooled estimate for efficacy [in terms of reduction in tic Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS) scores] and safety of oral ecopipam in subjects with TS.MethodsAll clinical trials that explored the efficacy and/or safety of ecopipam in patients with TS were included to determine the pooled estimate for change in YGTSS, Clinical Global Impression (CGI)-TS, and the severity of comorbid attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), obsessive compulsion disorder (OCD), and depressive symptoms, as well as the nature and frequency of adverse effects. Case-series, retrospective studies, and case reports were excluded. Databases, such as PUBMED, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and SCOPUS were searched to identify these trials using suitable combination of MESH terms/keywords on 15 June 2024. ROB 2.0 and ROBINS-I tool were used to assess the risk of bias in included randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized intervention studies, respectively, and the GRADE system to determine the certainty of the collated evidence.ResultsA total of 96 records were identified in the database search and 31 records were screened after removing duplicates. After excluding 23 irrelevant records, the full-text review included 8 records. Finally, six publications from three completed clinical trials (two RCTs, with one having an open-label extension) and one ongoing clinical trial were included. A total of 251 participants were included. The pooled estimate for mean change in YGTSS-TTS from baseline to the completion of the randomization period was statistically better in the ecopipam group compared with the placebo group [mean difference: − 3.0, 95% (confidence interval (CI) − 4.2 to − 1.9,I2= 55%,p< 0.0001]. The ecopipam group also fared statistically better in terms of YGTSS-motor tic score, phonic tic score, as well as CGI-TS-S (p< 0.0001). Changes in depressive and obsessive-compulsive symptoms were comparable in both groups, as well as the incidence of adverse effects.ConclusionsEcopipam is effective in reducing the severity of tics in subjects with TS and has a good safety profile. However, only a limited number of studies were included in the review, with some having small sample sizes and short duration of follow-up.This is a preview of subscription content,log in via an institutionto check access.Access this articleLog in via an institutionSubscribe and saveSpringer+from $39.99 /MonthStarting from 10 chapters or articles per monthAccess and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journalsCancel anytimeView plansBuy NowBuy article PDF USD 39.95Price excludes VAT (USA)Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout.Instant access to the full article PDF.Institutional subscriptionsFig. 1Fig. 2Fig. 3Fig. 4Fig. 5Fig. 6Fig. 7Fig. 8Fig. 9Similar content being viewed by othersUpdate on the Treatment of Tics in Tourette Syndrome and Other Chronic Tic DisordersArticle17 March 2020Altered cognitive response to serotonin challenge as a candidate endophenotype for obsessive-compulsive disorderArticle09 December 2015European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders—version 2.0. Part III: pharmacological treatmentArticleOpen access10 November 2021Explore related subjectsDiscover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.Movement disordersNeuropharmacologyParkinson's diseasePsychopharmacologyTranscranial magnetic stimulationTherapeuticsReferencesAlbin RL. Tourette syndrome: a disorder of the social decision-making network. Brain. 2018;141:332–47.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarBesag FM, Vasey MJ, Lao KS, Chowdhury U, Stern JS. Pharmacological treatment for Tourette syndrome in children and adults: what is the quality of the evidence? A systematic review. J Psychopharmacol. 2021;35:1037–61.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarAnderson SM. Tics and Tourette Around the Globe (TTAG) representing Tic and Tourette Syndrome (TS) patient associations around the world. European clinical guidelines for Tourette Syndrome and other tic disorders: patients’ perspectives on research and treatment. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2022;31:463–9.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarBillnitzer A, Jankovic J. Current management of tics and Tourette syndrome: behavioral, pharmacologic, and surgical treatments. Neurotherapeutics. 2020;17:1681–93.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarRamkiran S, Heidemeyer L, Gaebler A, Shah NJ, Neuner I. Alterations in basal ganglia-cerebello-thalamo-cortical connectivity and whole brain functional network topology in Tourette’s syndrome. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;24: 101998.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLin WD, Tsai FJ, Chou IC. Current understanding of the genetics of Tourette syndrome. Biomed J. 2022;45:271–9.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarAckermans L, Kuhn J, Neuner I, Temel Y, Visser-Vandewalle V. Surgery for Tourette syndrome. World Neurosurg. 2013;80:S29.e15-22.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarFelling RJ, Singer HS. Neurobiology of Tourette syndrome: current status and need for further investigation. J Neurosci. 2011;31:12387–95.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGanos C, Martino D. Tics and Tourette syndrome. Neurol Clin. 2015;33:115–36.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarHartmann A, Worbe Y. Tourette syndrome: clinical spectrum, mechanisms and personalized treatments. Curr Opin Neurol. 2018;31:504–9.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGilbert DL, Dubow JS, Cunniff TM, Wanaski SP, Atkinson SD, Mahableshwarkar AR. Ecopipam for Tourette syndrome: a randomized trial. Pediatrics. 2023;151: e2022059574.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarGilbert DL, Murphy TK, Jankovic J, Budman CL, Black KJ, Kurlan RM, et al. Ecopipam, a D1 receptor antagonist, for treatment of Tourette syndrome in children: a randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study. Mov Disord. 2018;33:1272–80.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarHartmann A, Worbe Y, Black KJ. Tourette syndrome research highlights from 2017. F1000Res. 2018;7:1122.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarLiberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, Mulrow C, Gøtzsche PC, Ioannidis JPA, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and elaboration. BMJ. 2009;339: b2700.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarSterne JAC, Savović J, Page MJ, Elbers RG, Blencowe NS, Boutron I, et al. RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ. 2019;366: l4898.ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarEgger M, Davey Smith G, Schneider M, Minder C. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. BMJ. 1997;315:629–34.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarGilbert DL, Budman CL, Singer HS, Kurlan R, Chipkin RE. A D1 receptor antagonist, ecopipam, for treatment of tics in Tourette syndrome. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2014;37:26–30.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarEmalex Biosciences Inc. A multicenter, open-label, extension study intended to evaluate the long-term safety of ecopipam tablets in children and adolescent subjects with Tourette’s syndrome [Internet]. clinicaltrials.gov; 2024. Report No.: NCT04114539.https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04114539. Accessed 1 Jan 2024.Freidy S, Dumitrescu T, Schmith V, Gilbert D, Mahableshwarkar A, Dubow J, et al. Increasing ecopipam exposure improves yale global tic severity scale-total tic scores (YGTSS-TTS) in children and adolescents with Tourette syndrome (TS): results from a population pharmacokinetic (popPK) model-based simulation using D1AMOND trial data (P5-9.007). Neurology. 2023;100:1722.ArticleGoogle ScholarEmalex Biosciences Inc. Ecopipam Treatment of Tourette’s Syndrome in Subjects 7-17 Years [Internet]. clinicaltrials.gov; 2024. Report No.: NCT02102698.https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT02102698. Accessed 1 Jan 2024.Cunniff T, Gilbert D, Wanaski S, Bittman R, Dubow J, Mahableshwarkar A. Design of a phase 3 maintenance-of-effect trial of ecopipam in Tourette syndrome (P12–11.011). Neurology. 2023;100:1863.ArticleGoogle ScholarHallett M. Tourette syndrome: update. Brain Dev. 2015;37:651–5.ArticlePubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarSeideman MF, Seideman TA. A review of the current treatment of Tourette syndrome. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2020;25:401–12.PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarFarhat LC, Behling E, Landeros-Weisenberger A, Levine JLS, MaculFerreiradeBarros P, Wang Z, et al. Comparative efficacy, tolerability, and acceptability of pharmacological interventions for the treatment of children, adolescents, and young adults with Tourette’s syndrome: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2023;7:112–26.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarHuys D, Hardenacke K, Poppe P, Bartsch C, Baskin B, Kuhn J. Update on the role of antipsychotics in the treatment of Tourette syndrome. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2012;8:95–104.ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarDutta N, Cavanna AE. The effectiveness of habit reversal therapy in the treatment of Tourette syndrome and other chronic tic disorders: a systematic review. Funct Neurol. 2013;28:7–12.PubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarBehling E, Farhat LC, Landeros-Weisenberger A, Bloch MH. Meta-Analysis: efficacy and tolerability of vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitors in the treatment of tic disorders. Mov Disord. 2022;37:684–93.ArticleCASPubMedGoogle ScholarGilbert DL, Batterson JR, Sethuraman G, Sallee FR. Tic reduction with risperidone versus pimozide in a randomized, double-Blind, crossover trial.  J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004;43:206–14.Yoo HK, Lee JS, Paik KW, Choi SH, Yoon SJ, Kim JE, et al. Open-label study comparing the efficacy and tolerability of aripiprazole and haloperidol in the treatment of pediatric tic disorders. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011;20:127–35.Karlsson P, Smith L, Farde L, Härnryd C, Sedvall G, Wiesel FA. Lack of apparent antipsychotic effect of the D1-dopamine receptor antagonist SCH39166 in acutely ill schizophrenic patients. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1995;121:309–16.Godar SC, Mosher LJ, Strathman HJ, Gochi AM, Jones CM, Fowler SC, et al. The D1CT‐7 mouse model of Tourette syndrome displays sensorimotor gating deficits in response to spatial confinement. Br J Pharmacol. 2016;173:2111–21.Jeon S, Walkup JT, Woods DW, Peterson A, Piacentini J, Wilhelm S, et al. Detecting a clinically meaningful change in tic severity in Tourette syndrome: a comparison of three methods. Contemp Clin Trials. 2013;36:414–20.Download referencesAuthor informationAuthor notesPrateek Kumar Panda, Pragnya Panda and Lesa Dawman contributed equally and share joint first authorship.Authors and AffiliationsPediatric Neurology Division, Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, 249203, IndiaPrateek Kumar Panda, Anand Santosh Mishra & Indar Kumar SharawatDepartment of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Raebareli, Uttar Pradesh, IndiaPragnya PandaDepartment of Pediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, IndiaLesa DawmanDepartment of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, IndiaVinod KumarAuthorsPrateek Kumar PandaView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarPragnya PandaView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarLesa DawmanView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarAnand Santosh MishraView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarVinod KumarView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarIndar Kumar SharawatView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence toIndar Kumar Sharawat.Ethics declarationsFundingThis research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.Conflict of interestAll authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.Ethics approvalThe study was approved by the institutional review board of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, India (AIIMS/IEC/24/401, Date-29 June 2024).Consent to participateNot applicable.Consent to publishNot applicable.Availability of data and materialData can be provided by the corresponding author on reasonable request.Code availabilityNot applicable.Author’s contributionsP.K.P., I.K.S., L.D., A.S.M., and P.P. were involved in the conception, acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data; P.K.P. and I.K.S. did initial search; L.D. and P.P. performed full text review; P.K.P., L.D., A.S.M., V.K., and I.K.S. drafted the initial draft; P.P. performed the statistical analysis; I.K.S., A.S.M., and V.K. critically revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final submitted manuscript and agree to be accountable for the work.Rights and permissionsSpringer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articlePanda, P.K., Panda, P., Dawman, L.et al.Safety and Efficacy of Ecopipam in Patients with Tourette Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.CNS Drugs39, 127–142 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-024-01140-wDownload citationAccepted:21 November 2024Published:27 December 2024Issue date:February 2025DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-024-01140-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy shareable link to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeAccess this articleLog in via an institutionSubscribe and saveSpringer+from $39.99 /MonthStarting from 10 chapters or articles per monthAccess and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journalsCancel anytimeView plansBuy NowBuy article PDF USD 39.95Price excludes VAT (USA)Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout.Instant access to the full article PDF.Institutional subscriptionsAdvertisement Update on the Treatment of Tics in Tourette Syndrome and Other Chronic Tic DisordersArticle17 March 2020 Altered cognitive response to serotonin challenge as a candidate endophenotype for obsessive-compulsive disorderArticle09 December 2015 European clinical guidelines for Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders—version 2.0. Part III: pharmacological treatmentArticleOpen access10 November 2021

---
*This content was automatically scraped by Webscraping Agent A*
