# Comparing Autistic and Non-Autistic Older Adults' Fall-Related Hospitalization Care and Outcomes.

**DOI:** 10.1007/s11606-025-09933-5
**Journal:** Journal of general internal medicine
**Date:** 2025-10-21
**Authors:** ['MadisonBlake', 'MelicaNikahd', 'J MadisonHyer', 'Brian WPatterson', 'Bethany JWolf', 'LaurenBishop', 'Brittany NHand']
**Category:** asd
**Source:** pubmed
**Scraped by:** agent_a
**Scraped at:** 2025-10-21T11:06:00.352284
**Source URL:** https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-025-09933-5

## Abstract



## Full Text Content

HomeJournal of General Internal MedicineArticleComparing Autistic and Non-Autistic Older Adults’ Fall-Related Hospitalization Care and OutcomesConcise Research ReportPublished:20 October 2025(2025)Cite this articleJournal of General Internal MedicineAims and scopeSubmit manuscriptMadison Blake BS1,Melica Nikahd MS2,J. Madison Hyer MS2,Brian W. Patterson MD3,Bethany J. Wolf PhD4,Lauren Bishop PhD5,6&…Brittany N. Hand PhDORCID:orcid.org/0000-0003-2026-84617Show authorsThis is a preview of subscription content,log in via an institutionto check access.Access this articleLog in via an institutionSubscribe and saveSpringer+from $39.99 /MonthStarting from 10 chapters or articles per monthAccess and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journalsCancel anytimeView plansBuy NowBuy article PDF USD 39.95Price excludes VAT (USA)Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout.Instant access to the full article PDF.Institutional subscriptionsExplore related subjectsDiscover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.Autism spectrum disordersDevelopmental DisabilitiesGeriatric CareGeriatricsPediatricsSocial CareData AvailabilityDue to the proprietary nature of the dataset, which is owned by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and the terms of our data use agreement, we are unable to share the data. However, if researchers obtain their own data use agreement to access Medicare data, we will share the syntax files needed to replicate our analytical dataset upon request to the corresponding author.REFERENCESGuirguis-Blake, J. M., Perdue, L. A., Coppola, E. L. & Bean, S. I.Interventions to Prevent Falls in Older Adults: Updated Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.JAMA332, 58–69 (2024).ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarMiller, H. L. et al.Motor problems in autism: Co-occurrence or feature?Dev. Med. Child Neurol.66, 16–22 (2024).ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarRoestorf A et al(2019) Older Adults with ASD: The Consequences of Aging.’ Insights from a series of special interest group meetings held at the International Society for Autism Research 2016–2017. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 63:3–12ArticleCASPubMedPubMed CentralGoogle ScholarCharlson, M. E., Carrozzino, D., Guidi, J. & Patierno, C.Charlson Comorbidity Index: A Critical Review of Clinimetric Properties.Psychother. Psychosom.91, 8–35 (2022).ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarCheng, D. et al.Updating and Validating the US Veterans Affairs Frailty Index: Transitioning From ICD-9 to ICD-10.J. Gerontol. Ser. -Biol. Sci. Med. Sci.76, 1318–1325 (2021).Google ScholarLockwood, K. J. & Porter, J.Effectiveness of Hospital-Based Interventions by Occupational Therapy Practitioners on Reducing Readmissions: A Systematic Review With Meta-Analyses.Am. J. Occup. Ther.76, 7601180050 (2022).ArticlePubMedGoogle ScholarCMS Office of Minority Health. Impact of Hospital Readmissions Reduction Initiatives on Vulnerable Populations. Baltimore, MD: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; (2020). Accessed October 13, 2025:https://www.cms.gov/files/document/impact-readmissions-reduction-initiatives-report.pdfDownload referencesAcknowledgementsJanet E. Childerhose, PhD, Division of General Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University.FundingResearch reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes on Aging of the NIH under award No. R01AG082873. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsCollege of Public Health, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USAMadison Blake BSCenter for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USAMelica Nikahd MS & J. Madison Hyer MSDepartment of Emergency Medicine, Berbee Walsh, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USABrian W. Patterson MDDivision of Biostatistics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charlston, SC, USABethany J. Wolf PhDWaisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USALauren Bishop PhDSandra Rosenbaum School of Social Work, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USALauren Bishop PhDDivision of General Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 700 Ackerman Drive, Columbus, OH, USABrittany N. Hand PhDAuthorsMadison Blake BSView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarMelica Nikahd MSView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarJ. Madison Hyer MSView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarBrian W. Patterson MDView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarBethany J. Wolf PhDView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarLauren Bishop PhDView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarBrittany N. Hand PhDView author publicationsSearch author on:PubMedGoogle ScholarContributionsMadison Blake: Conceptualization; Methodology; Formal Analysis; Writing – Original Draft; Writing – Review & Editing; Visualization. Melica Nikahd: Methodology; Data Curation; Writing – Review & Editing. J. Madison Hyer: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – Review & Editing. Brian W. Patterson: Conceptualization; Writing – Review & Editing. Bethany J. Wolf: Conceptualization; Writing – Review & Editing. Lauren Bishop: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – Review & Editing; Project Administration; Funding Acquisition. Brittany N. Hand: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – Review & Editing; Project Administration; Funding Acquisition.Corresponding authorCorrespondence toBrittany N. Hand PhD.Ethics declarationsHuman Ethics and Consent to ParticipateThis work was determined to be IRB exempt by The Ohio State University due to the use of limited datasets.Prior PresentationsThis work was submitted for presentation at the 2026 International Society for Autism Research Annual Meeting.Trial Registration NumberNA.Competing interestsNone.Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBlake, M., Nikahd, M., Hyer, J.M.et al.Comparing Autistic and Non-Autistic Older Adults’ Fall-Related Hospitalization Care and Outcomes.J GEN INTERN MED(2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-025-09933-5Download citationReceived:07 April 2025Accepted:07 October 2025Published:20 October 2025DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-025-09933-5Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy shareable link to clipboardProvided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiativeAccess this articleLog in via an institutionSubscribe and saveSpringer+from $39.99 /MonthStarting from 10 chapters or articles per monthAccess and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journalsCancel anytimeView plansBuy NowBuy article PDF USD 39.95Price excludes VAT (USA)Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout.Instant access to the full article PDF.Institutional subscriptionsAdvertisement

---
*This content was automatically scraped by Webscraping Agent A*
