---
title: Involvement of the Endothelial N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor on Vessel-Associated
  Positioning and Differentiation of Cortical Oligodendrocytes and on Motor Activity.**DOI:**
  10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0199-25.2025
authors:
- AlexandreBeranger
- "MorganeLafen\xEAtre"
- SabrinaLacomme
- AlexisLebon
- DamienGenty
- "M\xE9lanieBrosolo"
- "Fran\xE7oisJanin"
- "Ana\xEFsLeroy"
- "NicolasGu\xE9rout"
- DenisVivien
- LudovicGalas
- "St\xE9phaneMarret"
- FlorentMarguet
- EtienneGontier
- Bruno JGonzalez
- MarylineLecointre
journal: 'The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0199-25.2025
publication_date: ''
source: Processed from scraped content
processing_date: '2025-10-21T22:15:06.386490'
content_type: research_paper
conditions:
- related_disorders
topics:
- general
categories:
- related-disorders
reading_level: academic
audience:
- professional
- researcher
patient_friendly: false
search_priority: standard
keywords: []
search_tags:
- related_disorders
- peer-reviewed
- general
- academic
- research
---

# Involvement of the Endothelial N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor on Vessel-Associated Positioning and Differentiation of Cortical Oligodendrocytes and on Motor Activity.**DOI:** 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0199-25.2025

**Authors:** AlexandreBeranger, MorganeLafenêtre, SabrinaLacomme, AlexisLebon, DamienGenty, MélanieBrosolo, FrançoisJanin, AnaïsLeroy, NicolasGuérout, DenisVivien, LudovicGalas, StéphaneMarret, FlorentMarguet, EtienneGontier, Bruno JGonzalez, MarylineLecointre

**Journal:** The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience

**DOI:** 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0199-25.2025

## Abstract

During cortical development, attachment and detachment of oligodendrocyte precursors (OPC) to microvessels play a crucial role in their positioning and differentiation. In the developing brain, endothelial cells are regionally diverse, and previous studies showed a peak in the expression of cortical endothelial NMDA receptors (eNMDAR) during perinatal life, coinciding with OPC migration along cortical microvessels. This raises the hypothesis that eNMDAR might influence the fate of vessel-associated OPC. In this study, a Grin1

during cortical development, attachment and detachment of oligodendrocyte precursors (opc) to microvessels play a crucial role in their positioning and differentiation. in the developing brain, endothelial cells are regionally diverse, and previous studies showed a peak in the expression of cortical endothelial nmda receptors (enmdar) during perinatal life, coinciding with opc migration along cortical microvessels. this raises the hypothesis that enmdar might influence the fate of vessel-associated opc. in this study, a grin1 lox/lox /vecad cre mouse model was used to investigate in females and males the effects of endothelial glun1 invalidation (enmdar −/− ) on i) positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and myelination, ii) opc/microvessel association and endothelial mmp9-like activity, and iii) motor activity. results showed that, from p2 to p15, pdgfrα expression was increased in enmdar −/− mice and returned to wild-type levels by p45. cnpase and mbp expression was reduced at p15 and remained low in adult enmdar −/− mice. histological analysis revealed no change in opc-microvessel association, but positioning was altered with increased density in layers vi and v at p15. myelination was impaired, as evidenced by thinner corpus callosum, reduced myelin sheath thickness, and higher g-ratio. axonal mitochondria density was significantly increased. functional tests revealed that glutamate could not stimulate endothelial mmp9-like activity in enmdar −/− mice. molecular, histological and functional changes were linked to sensorimotor disabilities. at p45, despite the absence of observable myelination defects, locomotor impairments persisted, suggesting that early opc differentiation disruption contributes to lasting motor dysfunction. these findings offer new insights into opc vulnerability in human preterm infants. significance statement during brain development, oligodendrocyte precursors (opc) integrate the neocortex by migrating along radial microvessels. here, we show that targeted invalidation of the endothelial nmda receptor delays the positioning and the differentiation of opc in layers of the sensorimotor cortex resulting in sustainable under-expression of mbp, in reduced density of myelinated fibers, thinner myelin sheaths and higher g-ratio values. at a functional level, invalidation of the endothelial nmdar results in the inability for glutamate to stimulate mmp9-like activity. these molecular, cellular, and functional phenotypes are associated with neonatal and long-term motor impairments. our findings highlight the contribution of the endothelial nmda receptor on the differentiation of oligodendrocytes entering the sensorimotor cortex along microvessels. footnotes this work was supported by rouen university, france; institut national de la santé et recherche médicale (inserm, umr1245), france; rouen university hospital, france; the inserm us51 for access to cell imaging (primacen) and behavior (scac) platforms; blood & brain institute caen, france; france-bioimaging infrastructure (https://ror.org/01y7vt929) supported by the french national research agency (anr-24-inbs-0005 fbi biogen). ab is a recipient of a fellowship from the normandy region. the authors declare no competing financial interests ↵ * authors contributed equally sfn exclusive license . member log in log in using your username and password username * enter your journal of neuroscience username. password * enter the password that accompanies your username. forgot your user name or password? purchase access you may purchase access to this article. this will require you to create an account if you don't already have one. back to top email thank you for sharing this journal of neuroscience article. note: we request your email address only to inform the recipient that it was you who recommended this article, and that it is not junk mail. we do not retain these email addresses. your email * your name * send to * enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. you are going to email the following involvement of the endothelial n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor on vessel-associated positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and on motor activity message subject (your name) has forwarded a page to you from journal of neuroscience message body (your name) thought you would be interested in this article in journal of neuroscience. your personal message captcha this question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to prevent automated spam submissions. view full page pdf citation tools involvement of the endothelial n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor on vessel-associated positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and on motor activity alexandre beranger , morgane lafenêtre , sabrina lacomme , alexis lebon , damien genty , mélanie brosolo , françois janin , anaïs leroy , nicolas guérout , denis vivien , ludovic galas , stéphane marret , florent marguet , etienne gontier , bruno j. gonzalez , maryline lecointre journal of neuroscience 16 september 2025, e0199252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0199-25.2025 citation manager formats bibtex bookends easybib endnote (tagged) endnote 8 (xml) medlars mendeley papers refworks tagged ref manager ris zotero respond to this article request permissions share involvement of the endothelial n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor on vessel-associated positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and on motor activity alexandre beranger , morgane lafenêtre , sabrina lacomme , alexis lebon , damien genty , mélanie brosolo , françois janin , anaïs leroy , nicolas guérout , denis vivien , ludovic galas , stéphane marret , florent marguet , etienne gontier , bruno j. gonzalez , maryline lecointre journal of neuroscience 16 september 2025, e0199252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0199-25.2025 share this article: copy tweet widget facebook like google plus one jump to section article figures & data info & metrics eletters pdf responses to this article respond to this article jump to comment: no eletters have been published for this article. related articles cited by... more in this toc section research articles dysfunction of unc119, a transducin-binding protein, leads to cone-rod dystrophy through activating jak-stat and nf-κb inflammatory pathways in the mouse retina pathway-specific ultrastructure of thalamocortical synapses in mouse somatosensory area s2 camkii drives synaptic maturation by coordinating spine remodeling and receptor segregation via liquid-liquid phase separation show more research articles development/plasticity/repair dysfunction of unc119, a transducin-binding protein, leads to cone-rod dystrophy through activating jak-stat and nf-κb inflammatory pathways in the mouse retina prenatal downregulation of cb 1 cannabinoid receptors in the mouse prefrontal cortex disrupts cortical lamination and induces a transcriptional signature associated with social interaction deficits network activity shapes inhibitory synaptic development in the mouse hippocampus show more development/plasticity/repair if (!window.adbutler){(function(){var s = document.createelement("script"); s.async = true; s.type = "text/javascript";s.src = 'https://servedbyadbutler.com/app.js';var n = document.getelementsbytagname("script")[0]; n.parentnode.insertbefore(s, n);}());} var adbutler = adbutler || {}; adbutler.ads = adbutler.ads || []; var abkw = window.abkw || ''; var plc540737 = window.plc540737 || 0; document.write(' '); adbutler.ads.push({handler: function(opt){ adbutler.register(183357, 540737, [160,600], 'placement_540737_'+opt.place, opt); }, opt: { place: plc540737++, keywords: abkw, domain: 'servedbyadbutler.com', click:'click_macro_placeholder' }}); home alerts follow sfn on bluesky visit society for neuroscience on facebook follow society for neuroscience on twitter follow society for neuroscience on linkedin visit society for neuroscience on youtube follow our rss feeds content early release current issue issue archive collections information for authors for advertisers for the media for subscribers about about the journal editorial board privacy notice contact accessibility copyright © 2025 by the society for neuroscience. jneurosci online issn: 1529-2401 the ideas and opinions expressed in jneurosci do not necessarily reflect those of sfn or the jneurosci editorial board. publication of an advertisement or other product mention in jneurosci should not be construed as an endorsement of the manufacturer’s claims. sfn does not assume any responsibility for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from or related to any use of any material contained in jneurosci . /* */## Results
showed that, from p2 to p15, pdgfrα expression was increased in enmdar −/− mice and returned to wild-type levels by p45. cnpase and mbp expression was reduced at p15 and remained low in adult enmdar −/− mice. histological analysis revealed no change in opc-microvessel association, but positioning was altered with increased density in layers vi and v at p15. myelination was impaired, as evidenced by thinner corpus callosum, reduced myelin sheath thickness, and higher g-ratio. axonal mitochondria density was significantly increased. functional tests revealed that glutamate could not stimulate endothelial mmp9-like activity in enmdar −/− mice. molecular, histological and functional changes were linked to sensorimotor disabilities. at p45, despite the absence of observable myelination defects, locomotor impairments persisted, suggesting that early opc differentiation disruption contributes to lasting motor dysfunction. these findings offer new insights into opc vulnerability in human preterm infants. significance statement during brain development, oligodendrocyte precursors (opc) integrate the neocortex by migrating along radial microvessels. here, we show that targeted invalidation of the endothelial nmda receptor delays the positioning and the differentiation of opc in layers of the sensorimotor cortex resulting in sustainable under-expression of mbp, in reduced density of myelinated fibers, thinner myelin sheaths and higher g-ratio values. at a functional level, invalidation of the endothelial nmdar results in the inability for glutamate to stimulate mmp9-like activity. these molecular, cellular, and functional phenotypes are associated with neonatal and long-term motor impairments. our findings highlight the contribution of the endothelial nmda receptor on the differentiation of oligodendrocytes entering the sensorimotor cortex along microvessels. footnotes this work was supported by rouen university, france; institut national de la santé et recherche médicale (inserm, umr1245), france; rouen university hospital, france; the inserm us51 for access to cell imaging (primacen) and behavior (scac) platforms; blood & brain institute caen, france; france-bioimaging infrastructure (https://ror.org/01y7vt929) supported by the french national research agency (anr-24-inbs-0005 fbi biogen). ab is a recipient of a fellowship from the normandy region. the authors declare no competing financial interests ↵ * authors contributed equally sfn exclusive license . member log in log in using your username and password username * enter your journal of neuroscience username. password * enter the password that accompanies your username. forgot your user name or password? purchase access you may purchase access to this article. this will require you to create an account if you don't already have one. back to top email thank you for sharing this journal of neuroscience article. note: we request your email address only to inform the recipient that it was you who recommended this article, and that it is not junk mail. we do not retain these email addresses. your email * your name * send to * enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. you are going to email the following involvement of the endothelial n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor on vessel-associated positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and on motor activity message subject (your name) has forwarded a page to you from journal of neuroscience message body (your name) thought you would be interested in this article in journal of neuroscience. your personal message captcha this question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to prevent automated spam submissions. view full page pdf citation tools involvement of the endothelial n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor on vessel-associated positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and on motor activity alexandre beranger , morgane lafenêtre , sabrina lacomme , alexis lebon , damien genty , mélanie brosolo , françois janin , anaïs leroy , nicolas guérout , denis vivien , ludovic galas , stéphane marret , florent marguet , etienne gontier , bruno j. gonzalez , maryline lecointre journal of neuroscience 16 september 2025, e0199252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0199-25.2025 citation manager formats bibtex bookends easybib endnote (tagged) endnote 8 (xml) medlars mendeley papers refworks tagged ref manager ris zotero respond to this article request permissions share involvement of the endothelial n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor on vessel-associated positioning and differentiation of cortical oligodendrocytes and on motor activity alexandre beranger , morgane lafenêtre , sabrina lacomme , alexis lebon , damien genty , mélanie brosolo , françois janin , anaïs leroy , nicolas guérout , denis vivien , ludovic galas , stéphane marret , florent marguet , etienne gontier , bruno j. gonzalez , maryline lecointre journal of neuroscience 16 september 2025, e0199252025; doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0199-25.2025 share this article: copy tweet widget facebook like google plus one jump to section article figures & data info & metrics eletters pdf responses to this article respond to this article jump to comment: no eletters have been published for this article. related articles cited by... more in this toc section research articles dysfunction of unc119, a transducin-binding protein, leads to cone-rod dystrophy through activating jak-stat and nf-κb inflammatory pathways in the mouse retina pathway-specific ultrastructure of thalamocortical synapses in mouse somatosensory area s2 camkii drives synaptic maturation by coordinating spine remodeling and receptor segregation via liquid-liquid phase separation show more research articles development/plasticity/repair dysfunction of unc119, a transducin-binding protein, leads to cone-rod dystrophy through activating jak-stat and nf-κb inflammatory pathways in the mouse retina prenatal downregulation of cb 1 cannabinoid receptors in the mouse prefrontal cortex disrupts cortical lamination and induces a transcriptional signature associated with social interaction deficits network activity shapes inhibitory synaptic development in the mouse hippocampus show more development/plasticity/repair if (!window.adbutler){(function(){var s = document.createelement("script"); s.async = true; s.type = "text/javascript";s.src = 'https://servedbyadbutler.com/app.js';var n = document.getelementsbytagname("script")[0]; n.parentnode.insertbefore(s, n);}());} var adbutler = adbutler || {}; adbutler.ads = adbutler.ads || []; var abkw = window.abkw || ''; var plc540737 = window.plc540737 || 0; document.write(' '); adbutler.ads.push({handler: function(opt){ adbutler.register(183357, 540737, [160,600], 'placement_540737_'+opt.place, opt); }, opt: { place: plc540737++, keywords: abkw, domain: 'servedbyadbutler.com', click:'click_macro_placeholder' }}); home alerts follow sfn on bluesky visit society for neuroscience on facebook follow society for neuroscience on twitter follow society for neuroscience on linkedin visit society for neuroscience on youtube follow our rss feeds content early release current issue issue archive collections information for authors for advertisers for the media for subscribers about about the journal editorial board privacy notice contact accessibility copyright © 2025 by the society for neuroscience. jneurosci online issn: 1529-2401 the ideas and opinions expressed in jneurosci do not necessarily reflect those of sfn or the jneurosci editorial board. publication of an advertisement or other product mention in jneurosci should not be construed as an endorsement of the manufacturer’s claims. sfn does not assume any responsibility for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from or related to any use of any material contained in jneurosci . /* */## Scraping Notes- Successfully scraped from DOI.org